Matthew
His Testimony of Christ
Chapter 1
Genealogy from Abraham until the coming of Christ
1:1 The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the son of Abraham.
1:2 Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren; and Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram; and Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naason; and Naason begat Salmon; and Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse; and Jesse begat David the king.
1:3 And David the king begat Solomon of her whom David had taken of Urias; and Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa; and Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Ozias; and Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias; and Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias; and Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon.
1:4 And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobable; and Zorobable begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor; and Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud; and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, as the prophets have written, who is called Christ.
1:5 So all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon were fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon until Christ were fourteen generations.
Chapter 2
Birth of Christ
2:1 Now, as it is written, the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise. After his mother, Mary, was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.
2:2 Then Joseph, her husband, being a just man and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away privily.
2:3 But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a vision, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.
2:4 And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins.
2:5 Now this took place that all things might be fulfilled which were spoken of the Lord by the prophets, saying,
2:6 Behold, a virgin shall be with child and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel (which, being interpreted, is God with us).
2:7 Then Joseph, awaking out of his vision, did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife,
2:8 And knew her not until she had brought forth her firstborn son; and they called his name Jesus.
Chapter 3
Joseph flees to Egypt--John's mission--Baptism of Jesus
3:1 Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,
3:2 Saying, Where is the child that is born, the Messiah of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the east and have come to worship him.
3:3 When Herod the king had heard of the child, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
3:4 And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them, saying, Where is the place that is written of by the prophets, in which Christ should be born? For he greatly feared, yet he believed not the prophets.
3:5 And they said unto him, It is written by the prophets that he should be born in Bethlehem of Judea, for thus have they said,
3:6 The word of the Lord came unto us, saying, And thou Bethlehem, which lieth in the land of Judea, in thee shall be born a prince, which art not the least among the princes of Judea; for out of thee shall come the Messiah, who shall save my people Israel.
3:7 Then Herod, when he had called the wise men privily, inquired of them diligently at what time the star appeared.
3:8 And he sent them to Bethlehem and said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found the child, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.
3:9 When they had heard the king, they departed; and lo, the star which they saw in the east went before them until it came and stood over where the young child was.
3:10 When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
3:11 And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child, with Mary his mother, and fell down and worshiped him. And when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts: gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
3:12 And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
3:13 And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a vision, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and tarry thou there until I bring thee word; for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.
3:14 And then he arose, and took the young child and the child's mother by night, and departed into Egypt,
3:15 And was there until the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son.
3:16 Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem and all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men.
3:17 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, saying,
3:18 In Ramah there was a voice heard: lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning--Rachael weeping for the loss of her children, and would not be comforted because they were not.
3:19 But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a vision to Joseph in Egypt,
3:20 Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead who sought the young child's life.
3:21 And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
3:22 But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the stead of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither; but, notwithstanding, being warned of God in a vision, he went into the eastern part of Galilee;
3:23 And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.
3:24 And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come.
3:25 And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him.
3:26 And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh.
3:27 And in those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea,
3:28 And saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
3:29 For I am he who was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord and make his paths straight.
3:30 And the same John had his raiment of camels' hair and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his food was locusts and wild honey.
3:31 Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan,
3:32 And many were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.
3:33 But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O, generation of vipers! Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
3:34 Why is it that ye receive not the preaching of him whom God hath sent? If ye receive not this in your hearts, ye receive not me; and if ye receive not me, ye receive not him of whom I am sent to bear record; and for your sins ye have no cloak.
3:35 Repent, therefore, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance;
3:36 And think not to say within yourselves, We are the children of Abraham, and we only have power to bring seed unto our father Abraham; for I say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
3:37 And now, also, the axe is laid unto the root of the trees; therefore, every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.
3:38 I indeed baptize you with water, upon your repentance; and when he of whom I bear record cometh, who is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear (or whose place I am not able to fill), as I said, I indeed baptize you before he cometh, that when he cometh, he may baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire.
3:39 And it is he of whom I shall bear record, whose fan shall be in his hand; and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but in the fullness of his own time will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.
3:40 Thus came John, preaching and baptizing in the river of Jordan, bearing record that he who was coming after him had power to baptize with the Holy Ghost and fire.
3:41 And then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of him;
3:42 But John refused him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee. And why comest thou to me?
3:43 And Jesus, answering, said unto him, Suffer me to be baptized of thee, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him.
3:44 And John went down into the water and baptized him.
3:45 And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water; and John saw, and lo, the heavens were opened unto him; and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting upon Jesus.
3:46 And lo, he heard a voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him.
Chapter 4
Christ led away by the Spirit--Tempted of the devil--Commencement of Christ's ministry
4:1 Then Jesus was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be with God.
4:2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights and had communed with God, he was afterwards an hungered and was left to be tempted of the devil.
4:3 And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.
4:4 But Jesus answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
4:5 Then Jesus was taken up into the holy city, and the Spirit setteth him on the pinnacle of the temple.
4:6 Then the devil came unto him and said, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down; for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
4:7 Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord, thy God.
4:8 And again, Jesus was in the Spirit; and it taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them.
4:9 And the devil came unto him again and said, All these things will I give unto thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
4:10 Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord, thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him.
4:11 And now Jesus knew that John was cast into prison; and he sent angels, and behold, they came and ministered unto him.
4:12 And Jesus departed into Galilee; and leaving Nazareth in Zebulun, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the seacoast in the borders of Nephthalim,
4:13 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,
4:14 The land of Zebulun and the land of Nephthalim, in the way of the sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles;
4:15 The people which sat in darkness saw a great light; and unto them that sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up.
4:16 From that time, Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
4:17 And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon, called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishers.
4:18 And he said unto them, I am he of whom it is written by the prophets. Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.
4:19 And they, believing on his words, left their nets and straightway followed him.
4:20 And going on from thence, he saw two other brethren, James and John, his brother, the sons of Zebedee, in a ship with Zebedee, their father, mending their nets; and he called them.
4:21 And they immediately left their father in the ship and followed him.
4:22 And Jesus went about all Galilee teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of diseases among the people which believed on his name.
4:23 And his fame went throughout all Syria; and they brought unto him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases, and torments, and those who were possessed with devils, and those who were lunatic, and those that had the palsy; and he healed them.
4:24 And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judea, and beyond Jordan.
Chapter 5
Christ's teaching on the mount
5:1 And Jesus, seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain; and when he was set down, his disciples came unto him;
5:2 And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying,
5:3 Blessed are they who shall believe on me; and again, more blessed are they who shall believe on your words when ye shall testify that ye have seen me and that I am.
5:4 Yea, blessed are they who shall believe on your words, and come down into the depth of humility, and be baptized in my name; for they shall be visited with fire and the Holy Ghost and shall receive a remission of their sins.
5:5 Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
5:6 And again, blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.
5:7 And blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.
5:8 And blessed are all they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.
5:9 And blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy.
5:10 And blessed are all the pure in heart; for they shall see God.
5:11 And blessed are all the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of God.
5:12 Blessed are all they that are persecuted for my name's sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
5:13 And blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake;
5:14 For ye shall have great joy and be exceeding glad; for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.
5:15 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the salt of the earth; but if the salt shall lose its savor, wherewith shall the earth be salted? The salt shall thenceforth be good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden underfoot of men.
5:16 Verily, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the light of the world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid.
5:17 Behold, do men light a candle and put it under a bushel? Nay, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light to all that are in the house.
5:18 Therefore, let your light so shine before this world, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven.
5:19 Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.
5:20 For verily, I say unto you, Heaven and earth must pass away, but one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law until all be fulfilled.
5:21 Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments and shall teach men so to do, he shall in no wise be saved in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach these commandments of the law until it be fulfilled, the same shall be called great and shall be saved in the kingdom of heaven.
5:22 For I say unto you, except your righteousness shall exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
5:23 Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time that thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment of God.
5:24 But I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, or Rabcha, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire.
5:25 Therefore, if ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come unto me, or if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee,
5:26 Leave thou thy gift before the altar, and go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
5:27 Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him, lest at any time thine adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
5:28 Verily, I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence until thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.
5:29 Behold, it is written by them of old time that thou shalt not commit adultery.
5:30 But I say unto you that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
5:31 Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart; for it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell.
5:32 Therefore, if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
5:33 Or if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
5:34 And now this I speak, a parable concerning your sins; wherefore, cast them from you, that ye may not be hewn down and cast into the fire.
5:35 It hath been written that whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement.
5:36 Verily, verily, I say unto you that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.
5:37 Again, it hath been written by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths.
5:38 But I say unto you, Swear not at all: neither by heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King; neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.
5:39 But let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.
5:40 Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.
5:41 But I say unto you that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
5:42 And if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let him have it; and if he sue thee again, let him have thy cloak also.
5:43 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him a mile; and whosoever shall compel thee to go with him twain, thou shalt go with him twain.
5:44 Give to him that asketh of thee; and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.
5:45 Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.
5:46 But I say unto you, Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you;
5:47 That ye may be the children of your Father who is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
5:48 For if ye love only them which love you, what reward have you? Do not even the publicans the same?
5:49 And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? Do not even the publicans the same?
5:50 Ye are, therefore, commanded to be perfect, even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.
Chapter 6
Christ's teaching on the mount continued
6:1 And it came to pass that as Jesus taught his disciples, he said unto them, Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise, ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven.
6:2 Therefore, when thou doest alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily, I say unto you, They have their reward.
6:3 But when thou doest alms, let it be unto thee as thy left hand not knowing what thy right hand doeth,
6:4 That thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly.
6:5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men; for, verily, I say unto you, They have their reward.
6:6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet; and when thou hast shut the door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
6:7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions as the hypocrites do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
6:8 Therefore, be ye not like unto them; for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him.
6:9 Therefore, after this manner shall ye pray, saying,
6:10 Our Father who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.
6:11 Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven.
6:12 Give us this day our daily bread.
6:13 And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.
6:14 And suffer us not to be led into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
6:15 For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever and ever, Amen.
6:16 For if ye forgive men their trespasses, who trespass against you, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses.
6:17 Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily, I say unto you, They have their reward.
6:18 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father who seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
6:19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt and where thieves break through and steal.
6:20 But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves do not break through nor steal.
6:21 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
6:22 The light of the body is the eye; if, therefore, thine eye be single to the glory of God, thy whole body shall be full of light.
6:23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If, therefore, the light which is in thee be darkness, how great shall that darkness be.
6:24 No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
6:25 And again, I say unto you, Go ye into the world and care not for the world; for the world will hate you, and will persecute you, and will turn you out of their synagogues.
6:26 Nevertheless, ye shall go forth from house to house, teaching the people; and I will go before you.
6:27 And your heavenly Father will provide for you whatsoever things ye need for food, what ye shall eat, and for raiment, what ye shall wear or put on.
6:28 Therefore, I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your bodies, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?
6:29 Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not; neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they? How much more will he not feed you?
6:30 Wherefore, take no thought for these things, but keep my commandments wherewith I have commanded you.
6:31 For which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?
6:32 And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin.
6:33 And yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
6:34 Therefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he not provide for you if ye are not of little faith.
6:35 Therefore, take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
6:36 Why is it that ye murmur among yourselves, saying, We cannot obey thy word, because ye have not all these things, and seek to excuse yourselves, saying that after all these things do the Gentiles seek.
6:37 Behold, I say unto you that your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
6:38 Wherefore, seek not the things of this world; but seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God and to establish his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.
6:39 Take, therefore, no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day shall be the evil thereof.
Chapter 7
Christ instructs his disciples what to teach unto the world
7:1 Now these are the words which Jesus taught his disciples that they should say unto the people:
7:2 Judge not unrighteously, that ye be not judged; but judge righteous judgment.
7:3 For with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
7:4 And again, ye shall say unto them, Why is it that thou beholdest the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
7:5 Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and canst not behold a beam in thine own eye?
7:6 And Jesus said unto his disciples, Beholdest thou the scribes, and the Pharisees, and the priests, and the Levites? They teach in their synagogues, but do not observe the law nor the commandments; and all have gone out of the way and are under sin.
7:7 Go thou and say unto them, Why teach ye men the law and the commandments, when ye yourselves are the children of corruption?
7:8 Say unto them, Ye hypocrites! First cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.
7:9 Go ye into the world, saying unto all, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come nigh unto you.
7:10 And the mysteries of the kingdom ye shall keep within yourselves; for it is not meet to give that which is holy unto the dogs; neither cast ye your pearls unto swine, lest they trample them under their feet.
7:11 For the world cannot receive that which ye, yourselves, are not able to bear; wherefore, ye shall not give your pearls unto them, lest they turn again and rend you.
7:12 Say unto them, Ask of God; ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
7:13 For everyone that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened.
7:14 And then said his disciples unto him, They will say unto us, We ourselves are righteous and need not that any man should teach us. God, we know, heard Moses and some of the prophets; but us he will not hear.
7:15 And they will say, We have the law for our salvation, and that is sufficient for us.
7:16 Then Jesus answered and said unto his disciples, Thus shall ye say unto them:
7:17 What man among you, having a son, and he shall be standing out and shall say, Father, open thy house that I may come in and sup with thee, will not say, Come in, my son; for mine is thine, and thine is mine?
7:18 Or what man is there among you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone?
7:19 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
7:20 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?
7:21 Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
7:22 Repent, therefore, and enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction; and many there be who go in thereat.
7:23 Because strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life; and few there be that find it.
7:24 And again, beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
7:25 Ye shall know them by their fruits; for do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?
7:26 Even so, every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
7:27 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
7:28 Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.
7:29 Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them.
7:30 Verily, I say unto you, It is not everyone that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven.
7:31 For the day soon cometh that men shall come before me to judgment, to be judged according to their works.
7:32 And many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name; and in thy name cast out devils; and in thy name done many wonderful works?
7:33 And then will I say, Ye never knew me; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
7:34 Therefore, whosoever heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock; and the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house; and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.
7:35 And everyone that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand; and the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it.
7:36 And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings with his disciples, the people were astonished at his doctrine;
7:37 For he taught them as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the scribes.
Chapter 8
Jesus comes down from the mountain--Does many mighty works--Sends devils into swine
8:1 And when Jesus was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
8:2 And, behold, there came a leper worshiping him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
8:3 And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
8:4 And Jesus said unto him, See thou tell no man; but go thy way, and show thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.
8:5 And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him and saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.
8:6 And Jesus said unto him, I will come and heal him.
8:7 The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof; but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.
8:8 For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.
8:9 And when they that followed him heard this, they marveled. And when Jesus heard this, he said unto them that followed,
8:10 Verily, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith; no, not in Israel.
8:11 And I say unto you that many shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
8:12 But the children of the wicked one shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
8:13 And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour.
8:14 And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother laid and sick of a fever.
8:15 And he touched her hand, and the fever left her; and she arose and ministered unto them.
8:16 Now when the evening was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils; and he cast out the evil spirits with the word and healed all that were sick,
8:17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses.
8:18 Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to depart unto the other side of the sea.
8:19 And a certain scribe came unto him and said, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
8:20 And Jesus said unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head.
8:21 And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
8:22 But Jesus said unto him, Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead.
8:23 And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples came unto him.
8:24 And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves; but he was asleep.
8:25 And his disciples came unto him and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us, else we perish.
8:26 And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
8:27 Then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.
8:28 But the men marveled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?
8:29 And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him a man possessed of devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man could pass that way.
8:30 And, behold, he cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou come hither to torment us before the time?
8:31 And there was, a good way off from them, a herd of many swine feeding.
8:32 So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go into the herd of swine.
8:33 And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine; and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea and perished in the waters.
8:34 And they that kept them fled, and went their way into the city, and told everything which took place and what was befallen the possessed of the devils.
8:35 And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus; and when they saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.
Chapter 9
Jesus heals a man with palsy--Rejects the Jews with their baptism--Parable of wine and bottles
9:1 And Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city.
9:2 And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed; and Jesus, knowing their faith, said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee; go thy way and sin no more.
9:3 And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This man blasphemeth.
9:4 And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore is it that ye think evil in your hearts?
9:5 For is it not easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, than to say, Arise and walk?
9:6 But I said this that ye may know that the Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins.
9:7 Then Jesus said unto the sick of the palsy, Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thy house.
9:8 And he immediately arose and departed to his house.
9:9 But when the multitude saw it, they marveled and glorified God, who had given such power unto men.
9:10 And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man named Matthew, sitting at the place where they received tribute, as was customary in those days; and he said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.
9:11 And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and with his disciples.
9:12 And when the Pharisees saw them, they said unto his disciples, Why eateth your master with publicans and sinners?
9:13 But when Jesus heard them, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.
9:14 But go ye and learn what this meaneth: I will have mercy and not sacrifice; for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
9:15 And while he was thus teaching, there came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?
9:16 And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bride-chamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them?
9:17 But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them; and then shall they fast.
9:18 Then said the Pharisees unto him, Why will ye not receive us with our baptism, seeing we keep the whole law?
9:19 But Jesus said unto them, Ye keep not the law. If ye had kept the law, ye would have received me; for I am he who gave the law.
9:20 I receive not you with your baptism because it profiteth you nothing.
9:21 For when that which is new is come, the old is ready to be put away.
9:22 For no man putteth a piece of new cloth on an old garment; for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.
9:23 Neither do men put new wine into old bottles, else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish; but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.
9:24 While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler and worshiped him, saying, My daughter is even now dying; but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.
9:25 And Jesus arose and followed him, and also his disciples; and much people thronged him.
9:26 And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him and touched the hem of his garment.
9:27 For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.
9:28 But Jesus turned him about; and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour.
9:29 And when Jesus came into the ruler's house and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,
9:30 He said unto them, Give place; for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.
9:31 But when the people were put forth, he went in and took her by the hand; and the maid arose.
9:32 And the fame of Jesus went abroad into all that land.
9:33 And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying and saying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on us.
9:34 And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him; and Jesus said unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord.
9:35 Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith, be it unto you.
9:36 And their eyes were opened; and straitly he charged them, saying, Keep my commandments, and see ye tell no man in this place, that no man know it.
9:37 But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country.
9:38 And as they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil.
9:39 And when the devil was cast out, the dumb man spake. And the multitudes marveled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.
9:40 But the Pharisees said, He casteth out the devils through the prince of the devils.
9:41 And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and disease among the people.
9:42 But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them because they fainted and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.
9:43 Then said he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few.
9:44 Pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his harvest.
Chapter 10
Christ calls the Twelve--Gives them power over unclean spirits--Instructs the Twelve and sends them forth
10:1 And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power over unclean spirits, to cast them out and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease.
10:2 Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: the first, Simon, who is called Peter; and Andrew, his brother; James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother; Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew, the publican; James, the son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus; Simon, the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
10:3 These twelve Jesus sent forth and commanded them, saying,
10:4 Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and enter ye not into any city of the Samaritans.
10:5 But rather go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
10:6 And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.
10:7 Heal the sick; cleanse the lepers; raise the dead; cast out devils; freely ye have received, freely give.
10:8 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,
10:9 Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; for the workman is worthy of his meat.
10:10 And into whatsoever town or city ye shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.
10:11 And when ye come into a house, salute it; and if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
10:12 And whosoever shall not receive you nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet for a testimony against them.
10:13 And verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
10:14 Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye, therefore, wise servants and as harmless as doves.
10:15 But, beware of men; for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues.
10:16 And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.
10:17 But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak; for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.
10:18 And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child; and the children shall rise up against their parents and cause them to be put to death.
10:19 And ye shall be hated of all the world for my name's sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.
10:20 But when they persecute you in one city, flee ye into another; for verily, I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of Man come.
10:21 Remember, the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. It is enough that the disciple be as his master, and the servant as his lord.
10:22 If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household.
10:23 Fear them not, therefore; for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.
10:24 What I tell you in darkness, preach ye in light; and what ye hear in the ear, preach ye upon the housetops.
10:25 And fear not them who are able to kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
10:26 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father knoweth it.
10:27 And the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not, therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows.
10:28 Whosoever, therefore, shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father who is in heaven.
10:29 But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father who is in heaven.
10:30 Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; I came not to send peace, but a sword.
10:31 For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and a man's foes shall be they of his own household.
10:32 He who loveth father and mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
10:33 And he who taketh not his cross and followeth after me is not worthy of me.
10:34 He who seeketh to save his life shall lose it; and he who loseth his life for my sake shall find it.
10:35 He who receiveth you, receiveth me; and he who receiveth me, receiveth him who sent me.
10:36 He that receiveth a prophet, in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward.
10:37 He that receiveth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.
10:38 And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily, I say unto you, He shall in no wise lose his reward.
Chapter 11
John sends his disciples to Christ--Testimony of Christ concerning John
11:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
11:2 Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples;
11:3 And they said unto him, Art thou he of whom it is written in the prophets that he should come, or do we look for another?
11:4 Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and tell John again of those things which ye do hear and see,
11:5 How the blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, and the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached unto them.
11:6 And blessed is John and whosoever shall not be offended in me.
11:7 And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? Was it a reed shaken with the wind? And they answered him, No.
11:8 And he said, But what went ye out for to see? Was it a man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that wear soft raiment are in kings' houses.
11:9 But what went ye out for to see? a prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet.
11:10 For this is the one of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
11:11 Verily, I say unto you, Among them that are born of women, there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist; notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
11:12 And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.
11:13 But the days will come when the violent shall have no power; for all the prophets and the law prophesied that it should be thus until John.
11:14 Yea, as many as have prophesied have foretold of these days.
11:15 And if ye will receive it, verily, he was the Elias, who was for to come and prepare all things.
11:16 He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
11:17 But whereunto shall I liken this generation?
11:18 It is like unto children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned for you, and ye have not lamented.
11:19 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil.
11:20 The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold, a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.
11:21 But I say unto you, Wisdom is justified of her children.
11:22 Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
11:23 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long since in sackcloth and ashes.
11:24 But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment than for you.
11:25 And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
11:26 But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.
11:27 And at that time, there came a voice out of heaven. And Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight!
11:28 All things are delivered unto me of my Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son and they to whom the Son will reveal himself; they shall see the Father also.
11:29 Then spake Jesus, saying, Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
11:30 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
Chapter 12
Jesus teaches the scribes and Pharisees--Restores a withered hand on the Sabbath day
12:1 At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the corn; and his disciples were an hungered and began to pluck the ears of corn and to eat.
12:2 But when the Pharisees saw them, they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath day.
12:3 But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did when he was an hungered, and they that were with him? How he entered into the house of God and did eat the showbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them that were with him, but only for the priests?
12:4 Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the Sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and ye say they are blameless?
12:5 But I say unto you that in this place is one greater than the temple.
12:6 But if ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless. For the Son of Man is Lord, even of the Sabbath.
12:7 And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogues.
12:8 And, behold, there was a man which had a withered hand. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath days? that they might accuse him.
12:9 And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it and lift it out?
12:10 How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore, it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath days.
12:11 Then said he to the man, Stretch forth thy hand; and he stretched it forth, and it was restored whole, like unto the other.
12:12 Then the Pharisees went out and held a council against him, how they might destroy him.
12:13 But Jesus knew when they took counsel, and he withdrew himself from thence; and great multitudes followed him; and he healed their sick and charged them that they should not make him known,
12:14 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased.
12:15 I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.
12:16 A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench till he send forth judgment unto victory.
12:17 And in his name shall the Gentiles trust.
12:18 Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb; and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.
12:19 And all the people were amazed and said, Is this the Son of David?
12:20 But when the Pharisees heard that he had cast out the devil, they said, This man doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of devils.
12:21 And Jesus knew their thoughts and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom stand?
12:22 And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast out devils? Therefore, they shall be your judges.
12:23 But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you. For they also cast out devils by the Spirit of God, for unto them is given power over devils, that they may cast them out.
12:24 Or else, how can one enter into a strong man's house and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his house?
12:25 He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.
12:26 Wherefore, I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men who receive me and repent; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven unto men.
12:27 And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.
12:28 Either make the tree good and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt and his fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by the fruit.
12:29 And Jesus said, O ye generation of vipers! How can ye, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
12:30 A good man, out of the good treasure of the heart, bringeth forth good things; and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things.
12:31 And again I say unto you that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.
12:32 For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.
12:33 Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee. But he answered and said unto them,
12:34 An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it but the sign of the prophet Jonas; for as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly, so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
12:35 The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and ye behold a greater than Jonas is here.
12:36 The queen of the south shall rise up in the day of judgment with this generation and shall condemn it; for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and ye behold a greater than Solomon is here.
12:37 Then came some of the scribes and said unto him, Master, it is written that every sin shall be forgiven; but ye say, Whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven. And they asked him, saying, How can these things be?
12:38 And he said unto them, When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest and finding none; but when a man speaketh against the Holy Ghost, then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth him empty, swept, and garnished; for the good spirit leaveth him unto himself.
12:39 Then goeth the evil spirit and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in and dwell there; and the last end of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.
12:40 And while he yet talked with the people, behold, his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.
12:41 Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee.
12:42 But he answered and said unto the man that told him, Who is my mother? And who are my brethren?
12:43 And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
12:44 And he gave them charge concerning her, saying, I go my way, for my Father hath sent me. And whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.
Chapter 13
Jesus teaches the multitude in parables of the sower, the tares, and the mustard seed
13:1 And it came to pass the same day, Jesus went out of the house and sat by the seaside.
13:2 And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
13:3 And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow.
13:4 And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the wayside, and the fowls came and devoured them up.
13:5 Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth; and forthwith they sprang up; and when the sun was up, they were scorched because they had no deepness of earth; and because they had no root, they withered away.
13:6 And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up and choked them.
13:7 But others fell into good ground and brought forth fruit: some a hundredfold, some sixtyfold, and some thirtyfold. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
13:8 Then the disciples came and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables?
13:9 He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.
13:10 For whosoever receiveth, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance;
13:11 But whosoever continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.
13:12 Therefore, speak I to them in parables because they, seeing, see not; and hearing, they hear not; neither do they understand.
13:13 And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias concerning them, which saith, By hearing, ye shall hear and shall not understand; and seeing, ye shall see and shall not perceive.
13:14 For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them.
13:15 But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear. And blessed are you because these things are come unto you, that you might understand them.
13:16 And verily, I say unto you, Many righteous prophets have desired to see these days which you see, and have not seen them, and to hear that which you hear, and have not heard.
13:17 Hear ye, therefore, the parable of the sower.
13:18 When anyone heareth the word of the kingdom and understandeth not, then cometh the wicked one and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart; this is he who received seed by the wayside.
13:19 But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word and readily with joy receiveth it, yet he hath not root in himself, and endureth but for a while; for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.
13:20 He also who received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.
13:21 But he who received seed into the good ground is he who heareth the word and understandeth and endureth, which also beareth fruit and bringeth forth, some a hundredfold, some sixty, and some thirty.
13:22 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man who sowed good seed in his field;
13:23 But while he slept, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way.
13:24 But when the blade sprang up and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.
13:25 So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? Whence then hath it tares?
13:26 He said unto them, An enemy hath done this.
13:27 And the servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
13:28 But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.
13:29 Let both grow together until the harvest; and in the time of harvest, I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the wheat into my barn; and the tares are bound in bundles to be burned.
13:30 And another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field;
13:31 Which indeed is the least of all seeds; but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
13:32 Another parable spake he unto them: The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal until the whole was leavened.
13:33 All these things spake Jesus unto the multitudes in parables; and without a parable spake he not unto them,
13:34 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.
13:35 Then Jesus sent the multitude away and went into the house. And his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field.
13:36 He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man.
13:37 The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked.
13:38 The enemy that sowed them is the devil.
13:39 The harvest is the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked.
13:40 The reapers are the angels, or the messengers sent of heaven.
13:41 As, therefore, the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world, or the destruction of the wicked.
13:42 For in that day, before the Son of Man shall come, he shall send forth his angels and messengers of heaven.
13:43 And they shall gather out of his kingdom all things which offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them out among the wicked; and there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
13:44 For the world shall be burned with fire.
13:45 Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
13:46 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field. And when a man hath found a treasure which is hid, he secureth it and, straightway, for joy thereof, goeth, and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.
13:47 And again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant-man, seeking goodly pearls, who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had and bought it.
13:48 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the sea and gathered of every kind, which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.
13:49 So shall it be at the end of the world.
13:50 And the world is the children of the wicked.
13:51 The angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them out into the world to be burned. There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
13:52 Then Jesus said unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.
13:53 Then said he unto them, Every scribe well instructed in the things of the kingdom of heaven is like unto a householder: a man, therefore, which bringeth forth out of his treasure that which is new and old.
13:54 And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed thence.
13:55 And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogues, insomuch that they were astonished and said, Whence hath this Jesus this wisdom and these mighty works?
13:56 Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary? And his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?
13:57 Whence then hath this man all these things? And they were offended at him.
13:58 But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country and in his own house.
13:59 And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
Chapter 14
John the Baptist beheaded--A multitude miraculously fed--Jesus walks on water
14:1 At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus and said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead, and, therefore, mighty works do show forth themselves in him.
14:2 For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife.
14:3 For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.
14:4 And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude because they counted him as a prophet.
14:5 But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before them and pleased Herod.
14:6 Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask.
14:7 And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here, John Baptist's head in a charger.
14:8 And the king was sorry; nevertheless for the oath's sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given.
14:9 And he sent and beheaded John in the prison.
14:10 And his head was brought in a charger and given to the damsel; and she brought it to her mother.
14:11 And his disciples came and took up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus.
14:12 When Jesus heard that John was beheaded, he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart; and when the people had heard of him, they followed him on foot out of the cities.
14:13 And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion towards them, and he healed their sick.
14:14 And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages and buy themselves victuals.
14:15 But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart; give ye them to eat.
14:16 And they said unto him, We have here but five loaves and two fishes. He said, Bring them hither to me.
14:17 And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass; and he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke, and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples, to the multitude.
14:18 And they did all eat and were filled. And they took up of the fragments that remained, twelve baskets full. And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
14:19 And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain, apart, to pray.
14:20 And when the evening was come, he was there alone. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with the waves; for the wind was contrary.
14:21 And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea.
14:22 And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.
14:23 But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is I. Be not afraid.
14:24 And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water. And he said, Come.
14:25 And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water to go to Jesus. But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and, beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.
14:26 And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
14:27 And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.
14:28 Then they that were in the ship came and worshiped him, saying, Of a truth, thou art the Son of God.
14:29 And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Gennesaret.
14:30 And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased, and besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment; and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.
Chapter 15
Christ goes into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon--Great multitudes come to him--He heals the lame, the blind, and dumb
15:1 Then came to Jesus, scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying,
15:2 Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? For they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
15:3 But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?
15:4 For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and mother; and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death which Moses shall appoint.
15:5 But ye say, Whosoever shall say to father or mother, By whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me, it is a gift from me, and honor not his father or mother, it is well.
15:6 Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.
15:7 O ye hypocrites! Well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people draw nigh unto me with their mouth and honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
15:8 But in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and the commandments of men.
15:9 And he called the multitude and said unto them, Hear and understand.
15:10 Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth the man.
15:11 Then came his disciples and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended after they heard this saying?
15:12 But he answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up.
15:13 Let them alone; they be blind leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.
15:14 Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable.
15:15 And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding?
15:16 Do ye not yet understand that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly and is cast into the draught?
15:17 But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man.
15:18 For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies;
15:19 These are things which defile a man. But to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man.
15:20 Then Jesus went thence and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
15:21 And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.
15:22 But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.
15:23 He answered, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
15:24 Then came she and worshiped him, saying, Lord, help me.
15:25 But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's bread and cast it to dogs.
15:26 And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the master's table.
15:27 Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.
15:28 And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee, and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.
15:29 And great multitudes came unto him, having with them some lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus' feet; and he healed them, insomuch that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see. And they glorified the God of Israel.
15:30 Then Jesus called his disciples and said, I have compassion on the multitude because they continue with me now three days and have nothing to eat; and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.
15:31 And his disciples said unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?
15:32 And Jesus said unto them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few little fishes.
15:33 And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.
15:34 And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake the bread, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples, to the multitude.
15:35 And they did all eat and were filled. And they took up of the broken meat, seven baskets full.
15:36 And they that did eat were four thousand men, besides women and children.
15:37 And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.
Chapter 16
Jesus warns of the doctrine of Pharisees and Sadducees--Asks his disciples who men say he is--Delivers keys of the kingdom to Peter
16:1 The Pharisees also, with the Sadducees, came, and, tempting Jesus, desired him that he would show them a sign from heaven.
16:2 And he answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, The weather is fair, for the sky is red; and in the morning ye say, The weather is foul today, for the sky is red and lowering.
16:3 O hypocrites! Ye can discern the face of the sky; but ye cannot tell the signs of the times.
16:4 A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it but the sign of the prophet Jonas.
16:5 And he left them and departed.
16:6 And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to take bread.
16:7 Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
16:8 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, He said this because we have taken no bread.
16:9 And when they reasoned among themselves, Jesus perceived it; and he said unto them, O ye of little faith! Why reason ye among yourselves because ye have brought no bread?
16:10 Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
16:11 Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
16:12 How is it that you do not understand that I spoke not unto you concerning bread, that you should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?
16:13 Then understood they, how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
16:14 And when Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?
16:15 And they said, Some say John the Baptist; some Elias; and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.
16:16 He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am?
16:17 And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
16:18 And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father who is in heaven.
16:19 And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter; and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
16:20 And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
16:21 Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was Jesus, the Christ.
16:22 From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples how that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day.
16:23 Then Peter took him and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord; this shall not be done unto thee.
16:24 But he turned and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan; thou art an offense unto me; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.
16:25 Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
16:26 And now for a man to take up his cross is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments.
16:27 Break not my commandments for to save your lives; for whosoever will save his life in this world shall lose it in the world to come.
16:28 And whosoever will lose his life in this world for my sake shall find it in the world to come.
16:29 Therefore, forsake the world and save your souls; for what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
16:30 For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works.
16:31 Verily, I say unto you, There be some standing here which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.
Chapter 17
Christ transfigured upon the mountain
17:1 And after six days, Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John, his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain, apart, and was transfigured before them; and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.
17:2 And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias, talking with him.
17:3 Then answered Peter and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here; if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles: one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias.
17:4 While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them; and, behold, a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.
17:5 And when the disciples heard the voice, they fell on their faces and were sore afraid.
17:6 And Jesus came, and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.
17:7 And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only.
17:8 And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man until the Son of Man be risen again from the dead.
17:9 And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come?
17:10 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come and restore all things, as the prophets have written.
17:11 And again I say unto you that Elias has come already, concerning whom it is written, Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me; and they knew him not and have done unto him whatsoever they listed.
17:12 Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of them.
17:13 But I say unto you, Who is Elias? Behold, this is Elias, whom I send to prepare the way before me.
17:14 Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist, and also of another, who should come and restore all things, as it is written by the prophets.
17:15 And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a man kneeling down to him and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son; for he is lunatic and sore vexed; for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water.
17:16 And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.
17:17 Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring him hither to me.
17:18 And Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of him; and the child was cured from that very hour.
17:19 Then came the disciples to Jesus, apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out?
17:20 And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief; for, verily, I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove to yonder place, and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.
17:21 Howbeit, this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
17:22 And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of Man shall be betrayed into the hands of men; and they shall kill him; and the third day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry.
17:23 And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute came to Peter and said, Doth not your master pay tribute? He said, Yea.
17:24 And when he was come into the house, Jesus rebuked him, saying,
17:25 What thinkest thou, Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom, or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?
17:26 Peter said unto him, Of strangers. Jesus said unto him, Then are the children free. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast a hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money; that take and give unto them for me and thee.
Chapter 18
The parable of the lord and his servants--Likened unto the kingdom of heaven
18:1 At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
18:2 And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily, I say unto you, Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
18:3 Whosoever, therefore, shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
18:4 And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.
18:5 But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
18:6 Woe unto the world because of offenses! For it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh!
18:7 Wherefore, if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than, having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.
18:8 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than, having two eyes, to be cast into hellfire.
18:9 And a man's hand is his friend, and his foot, also; and a man's eye are they of his own household.
18:10 Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven.
18:11 For the Son of Man is come to save that which was lost and to call sinners to repentance; but these little ones have no need of repentance, and I will save them.
18:12 How think ye? If a man have a hundred sheep and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?
18:13 And if it so be that he find it, verily, I say unto you, He rejoiceth more over that which was lost than over the ninety and nine which went not astray.
18:14 Even so, it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.
18:15 Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.
18:16 But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
18:17 And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto you as a heathen man and a publican.
18:18 Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
18:19 Again, I say unto you that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, that they may not ask amiss, it shall be done for them of my Father who is in heaven.
18:20 For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
18:21 Then came Peter to him and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?
18:22 Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven.
18:23 Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, who would take account of his servants.
18:24 And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him who owed him ten thousand talents.
18:25 But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
18:26 And the servant besought him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
18:27 Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. The servant, therefore, fell down and worshiped him.
18:28 But the same servant went out and found one of his fellow servants which owed him a hundred pence; and he laid hands on him and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest.
18:29 And his fellow servant fell down at his feet and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
18:30 And he would not; but went and cast him into prison till he should pay the debt.
18:31 So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came, and told unto their lord all that was done.
18:32 Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant! I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me; shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee?
18:33 And his lord was wroth and delivered him to the tormentors till he should pay all that was due unto him.
18:34 So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not everyone his brother their trespasses.
Chapter 19
The Pharisees, tempting Christ, ask if it be lawful to put away one's wife
19:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan.
19:2 And great multitudes followed him; and many believed on him, and he healed them there.
19:3 The Pharisees came also unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
19:4 And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read that he who made man at the beginning made him, male and female,
19:5 And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother and shall cleave unto his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh?
19:6 Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What, therefore, God hath joined together let not man put asunder.
19:7 They said unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement and to put her away?
19:8 He said unto them, Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it was not so.
19:9 And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except for fornication, and shall marry another committeth adultery; and whoso marrieth her that is put away doth commit adultery.
19:10 His disciples said unto him, If the case of the man be so with a wife, it is not good to marry.
19:11 But he said unto them, All cannot receive this saying; it is not for them save to whom it is given.
19:12 For there are some eunuchs which were so born from their mother's womb; and there are some eunuchs which were made eunuchs of men; and there be eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive, let him receive my sayings.
19:13 Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them and pray. And the disciples rebuked them, saying, There is no need, for Jesus hath said, Such shall be saved.
19:14 But Jesus said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
19:15 And he laid hands on them and departed thence.
19:16 And, behold, one came and said, Good master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?
19:17 And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? There is none good but one, that is God; but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.
19:18 He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness.
19:19 Honor thy father and mother. And, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
19:20 The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up. What lack I yet?
19:21 Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come and follow me.
19:22 But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions.
19:23 Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily, I say unto you that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.
19:24 And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.
19:25 When his disciples heard this, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?
19:26 But Jesus beheld their thoughts and said unto them, With men this is impossible; but if they will forsake all things for my sake, with God whatsoever things I speak are possible.
19:27 Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee. What shall we have therefore?
19:28 And Jesus said unto them, Verily, I say unto you that ye who have followed me shall, in the resurrection, when the Son of Man shall come sitting on the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
19:29 And everyone that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive a hundredfold and shall inherit everlasting life.
19:30 But many of the first shall be last, and the last first.
Chapter 20
The kingdom of heaven likened unto a man hiring laborers in his vineyard
20:1 For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man, a householder, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard.
20:2 And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
20:3 And he went out about the third hour, and found others standing idle in the market place,
20:4 And said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, I will give you; and they went their way.
20:5 And again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour and did likewise.
20:6 And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and said unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?
20:7 They said unto him, Because no man hath hired us.
20:8 He said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, ye shall receive.
20:9 So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard said unto his steward, Call the laborers and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first.
20:10 And when they came that began about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.
20:11 But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny. And when they had received a penny, they murmured against the good man of the house, saying, These last have wrought one hour only, and thou hast made them equal unto us, who have borne the burden and the heat of the day.
20:12 But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong; didst not thou agree with me for a penny?
20:13 Take thine and go thy way; I will give unto this last even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?
20:14 Is thine eye evil because I am good?
20:15 So the last shall be first, and the first last; for many are called, but few chosen.
20:16 And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart in the way and said unto them,
20:17 Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify. And the third day he shall rise again.
20:18 Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her sons, worshiping Jesus and desiring a certain thing of him.
20:19 And he said unto her, What wilt thou that I should do?
20:20 And she said unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom.
20:21 But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
20:22 They said unto him, We are able.
20:23 And he said unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right hand and on my left is for whom it is prepared of my Father, but not mine to give.
20:24 And when the ten heard this, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren.
20:25 But Jesus called them and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them; but it shall not be so among you.
20:26 But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister.
20:27 And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant,
20:28 Even as the Son of Man came, not to be ministered unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many.
20:29 And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
20:30 And, behold, two blind men sitting by the wayside, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, Son of David.
20:31 And the multitude rebuked them, saying they should hold their peace; but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, Son of David.
20:32 And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you?
20:33 They said unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
20:34 So Jesus had compassion and touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.
Chapter 21
Christ rides into Jerusalem on a colt
21:1 And when Jesus drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and they were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples,
21:2 Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find a colt tied; loose it and bring it unto me; and if any shall say aught unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of it; and straightway he will send it.
21:3 All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,
21:4 Tell ye the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy king cometh unto thee, and he is meek, and he is sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the foal of an ass.
21:5 And the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the colt, and put on it their clothes; and Jesus took the colt and sat thereon; and they followed him.
21:6 And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees and strewed in the way.
21:7 And the multitudes that went before, and also that followed after, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!
21:8 And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?
21:9 And the multitude said, This is Jesus of Nazareth, the prophet of Galilee.
21:10 And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers and the seats of them that sold doves, and said unto them,
21:11 It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.
21:12 And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them.
21:13 And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children of the kingdom crying in the temple and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, they were sore displeased and said unto him, Hearest thou what these say?
21:14 And Jesus said unto them, Yea. Have ye never read the scriptures which saith, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, O Lord, thou hast perfected praise?
21:15 And he left them, and went out of the city unto Bethany, and he lodged there.
21:16 Now in the morning, as he returned into the city, he hungered.
21:17 And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it; and there was not any fruit on it, but leaves only. And he said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward, forever. And presently the fig tree withered away.
21:18 And when the disciples saw this, they marveled and said, How soon is the fig tree withered away!
21:19 Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily, I say unto you, If ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this to the fig tree, but also, if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea, it shall be done.
21:20 And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, in faith believing, ye shall receive.
21:21 And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching and said, By what authority doest thou these things? And who gave thee this authority?
21:22 And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I, likewise, will tell you by what authority I do these things.
21:23 The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or of men?
21:24 And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven, he will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him? But if we shall say, Of men, we fear the people. For all people held John as a prophet. And they answered Jesus and said, We cannot tell.
21:25 And he said, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.
21:26 But what think ye? A man had two sons; and he came to the first, saying, Son, go work today in my vineyard.
21:27 He answered and said, I will not; but afterward he repented and went.
21:28 And he came to the second and said likewise. And he answered and said, I will serve; and went not.
21:29 Whether of these twain did the will of their father?
21:30 They said unto him, The first.
21:31 Jesus said unto them, Verily, I say unto you that the publicans and harlots shall go into the kingdom of God before you.
21:32 For John came unto you in the way of righteousness and bare record of me, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots believed him; and ye, afterward, when ye had seen me, repented not, that ye might believe him.
21:33 For he that believed not John concerning me cannot believe me, except he first repent.
21:34 And except ye repent, the preaching of John shall condemn you in the day of judgment. And again, hear another parable; for unto you that believe not, I speak in parables, that your unrighteousness may be rewarded unto you.
21:35 Behold, there was a certain householder, who planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.
21:36 And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.
21:37 And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
21:38 Again, he sent other servants, more than the first; and they did unto them likewise.
21:39 But last of all, he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son.
21:40 But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.
21:41 And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him.
21:42 And Jesus said unto them, When the Lord, therefore, of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?
21:43 They said unto him, He will destroy those miserable, wicked men and will let out the vineyard unto other husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
21:44 Jesus said unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner; this is the Lord's doings, and it is marvelous in our eyes.
21:45 Therefore, say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
21:46 For whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
21:47 And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke of them.
21:48 And they said among themselves, Shall this man think that he alone can spoil this great kingdom? And they were angry with him.
21:49 But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude because they learned that the multitude took him for a prophet.
21:50 And now his disciples came to him; and Jesus said unto them, Marvel ye at the words of the parable which I spake unto them?
21:51 Verily, I say unto you, I am the stone, and those wicked ones reject me.
21:52 I am the head of the corner. These Jews shall fall upon me and shall be broken.
21:53 And the kingdom of God shall be taken from them and shall be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof (meaning the Gentiles).
21:54 Wherefore, on whomsoever this stone shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.
21:55 And when the Lord, therefore, of the vineyard cometh, he will destroy those miserable, wicked men, and will let again his vineyard unto other husbandmen, even in the last days, who shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
21:56 And then understood they the parable which he spake unto them, that the Gentiles should be destroyed also, when the Lord should descend out of heaven to reign in his vineyard, which is the earth and the inhabitants thereof.
Chapter 22
Parable of the marriage supper
22:1 And Jesus answered the people again, and spake unto them in parables, and said,
22:2 The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, who made a marriage for his son.
22:3 And when the marriage was ready, he sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding; and they would not come.
22:4 Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them that are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my oxen, and my fatlings have been killed, and my dinner is ready, and all things are prepared; therefore, come unto the marriage.
22:5 But they made light of the servants and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise;
22:6 And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.
22:7 But when the king heard that his servants were dead, he was wroth; and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.
22:8 Then said he to his servants, The wedding is ready; but they who were bidden were not worthy.
22:9 Go ye, therefore, into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.
22:10 So those servants went out into the highways and gathered together all, as many as they found, both bad and good; and the wedding was furnished with guests.
22:11 But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who had not a wedding garment.
22:12 And he said unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.
22:13 Then said the king unto his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take and cast him away into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
22:14 For many are called, but few chosen; wherefore, all do not have on the wedding garment.
22:15 Then went the Pharisees and took counsel how they might entangle him in talk.
22:16 And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any; for thou regardest not the person of men.
22:17 Tell us, therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?
22:18 But Jesus perceived their wickedness and said, Ye hypocrites! Why tempt ye me? Show me the tribute money.
22:19 And they brought unto him a penny.
22:20 He said unto them, Whose image is this, and superscription?
22:21 They said unto him, Caesar's. Then said he unto them, Render, therefore, unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things which are God's.
22:22 And when they had heard him say these words, they marveled, and left him, and went their way.
22:23 The same day came the Sadducees to him, who say that there is no resurrection, and asked him, saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife and raise up seed unto his brother.
22:24 Now there were with us, seven brethren; and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased; and, having no issue, he left his wife unto his brother.
22:25 Likewise the second also, and the third, and even unto the seventh.
22:26 And last of all the woman died also.
22:27 Therefore, in the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven? For they all had her.
22:28 Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God.
22:29 For in the resurrection, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.
22:30 But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you of God, saying,
22:31 I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
22:32 And when the multitude heard him, they were astonished at his doctrine.
22:33 But when the Pharisees heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.
22:34 Then one of them, a lawyer, tempting him, asked, saying,
22:35 Master, which is the great commandment in the law?
22:36 Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
22:37 This is the first and great commandment.
22:38 And the second is like unto it: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
22:39 On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
22:40 While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, saying, What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he?
22:41 They said unto him, The Son of David.
22:42 He said unto them, How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool?
22:43 If David then called him Lord, how is he his son?
22:44 And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.
Chapter 23
Christ upbraids scribes for their hypocrisy--Weeps over Jerusalem
23:1 Then spake Jesus to the multitude and to his disciples, saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat.
23:2 All, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, they will make you observe and do; for they are ministers of the law, and they make themselves your judges. But do not ye after their works; for they say, and do not.
23:3 For they bind heavy burdens and lay on men's shoulders, and they are grievous to be borne; but they will not move them with one of their fingers.
23:4 And all their works they do to be seen of men. They make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi (which is master).
23:5 But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your master, which is Christ; and all ye are brethren.
23:6 And call no one your creator upon the earth, or your heavenly Father; for one is your creator and heavenly Father, even he who is in heaven.
23:7 Neither be ye called Master; for one is your master, even he whom your heavenly Father sent, which is Christ; for he hath sent him among you that ye might have life.
23:8 But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
23:9 And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased of him; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted of him.
23:10 But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
23:11 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees! For ye are hypocrites! Ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; therefore, ye shall receive the greater punishment.
23:12 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made, you make him twofold more the child of hell than he was before, like unto yourselves.
23:13 Woe unto you, blind guides, who say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he committeth sin and is a debtor.
23:14 You are fools and blind; for which is the greater, the gold or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?
23:15 And ye say, Whosoever sweareth by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.
23:16 O fools and blind! For which is the greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?
23:17 Verily, I say unto you, Whoso, therefore, sweareth by it, sweareth by the altar and by all things thereon.
23:18 And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it and by him who dwelleth therein.
23:19 And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God and by him who sitteth thereon.
23:20 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier things of the law: judgment, mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have done and not to leave the other undone.
23:21 You blind guides, who strain at a gnat and swallow a camel, who make yourselves appear unto men that ye would not commit the least sin; and yet you, yourselves, transgress the whole law.
23:22 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter; but within they are full of extortion and excess.
23:23 You blind Pharisees! Cleanse first the cup and platter within, that the outside of them may be clean also.
23:24 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outwardly, but are within full of the bones of the dead and of all uncleanness.
23:25 Even so, you also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
23:26 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous,
23:27 And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets,
23:28 Wherefore, you are witnesses unto yourselves of your own wickedness; and you are the children of them who killed the prophets,
23:29 And will fill up the measure then of your fathers; for you, yourselves, kill the prophets like unto your fathers.
23:30 You serpents and generation of vipers! How can you escape the damnation of hell?
23:31 Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and of them you shall kill and crucify; and of them you shall scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city;
23:32 That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.
23:33 Verily, I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.
23:34 You bear testimony against your fathers when you, yourselves, are partakers of the same wickedness.
23:35 Behold your fathers did it through ignorance, but you do not; wherefore, their sins shall be upon your heads.
23:36 Then Jesus began to weep over Jerusalem, saying,
23:37 O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! You who will kill the prophets and will stone them who are sent unto you, how often would I have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings; and ye would not.
23:38 Behold, your house is left unto you desolate!
23:39 For I say unto you that you shall not see me henceforth and know that I am he of whom it is written by the prophets, until ye shall say,
23:40 Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, in the clouds of heaven, and all the holy angels with him.
23:41 Then understood his disciples that he should come again on the earth after that he was glorified and crowned on the right hand of God.
Chapter 24
Christ foretells destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the wicked
24:1 And Jesus went out and departed from the temple; and his disciples came to him for to hear him, saying, Master, show us concerning the buildings of the temple; as thou hast said, They shall be thrown down and left unto you desolate.
24:2 And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? And do you not understand them? Verily, I say unto you, There shall not be left here upon this temple one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down.
24:3 And Jesus left them and went upon the mount of Olives.
24:4 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be which thou hast said concerning the destruction of the temple, and the Jews; and what is the sign of thy coming and of the end of the world (or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world)?
24:5 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you.
24:6 For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.
24:7 Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall kill you; and you shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.
24:8 And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.
24:9 And many false prophets shall arise and shall deceive many.
24:10 And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.
24:11 But he that remaineth steadfast and is not overcome, the same shall be saved.
24:12 When you, therefore, shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, then you shall stand in the holy place. (Whoso readeth let him understand.)
24:13 Then let them who are in Judea flee into the mountains.
24:14 Let him who is on the housetop flee and not return to take anything out of his house.
24:15 Neither let him who is in the field return back to take his clothes.
24:16 And woe unto them that are with child and unto them that give suck in those days!
24:17 Therefore, pray ye the Lord that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day.
24:18 For then, in those days, shall be great tribulations on the Jews and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, such as was not before sent upon Israel, of God, since the beginning of their kingdom until this time, no, nor ever shall be sent again upon Israel.
24:19 All things which have befallen them are only the beginning of the sorrows which shall come upon them; and except those days should be shortened, there should none of their flesh be saved.
24:20 But for the elect's sake, according to the covenant, those days shall be shortened.
24:21 Behold, these things I have spoken unto you concerning the Jews.
24:22 And again, after the tribulation of those days which shall come upon Jerusalem, if any man shall say unto you, Lo! Here is Christ, or there, believe him not.
24:23 For in those days, there shall also arise false Christs and false prophets and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant.
24:24 Behold, I speak these things unto you for the elect's sake.
24:25 And you also shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled; for all I have told you must come to pass. But the end is not yet.
24:26 Behold, I have told you before, Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth, or, Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.
24:27 For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.
24:28 And now I show unto you a parable: Behold, wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together; so likewise shall mine elect be gathered from the four quarters of the earth.
24:29 And they shall hear of wars and rumors of wars. Behold, I speak unto you for mine elect's sake.
24:30 For nation shall rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom; there shall be famine, and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers places.
24:31 And again, because iniquity shall abound, the love of men shall wax cold; but he that shall not be overcome, the same shall be saved.
24:32 And again, this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked.
24:33 And again, shall the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, be fulfilled.
24:34 And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
24:35 Verily, I say unto you, This generation, in which these things shall be shown forth, shall not pass away until all I have told you shall be fulfilled.
24:36 Although the days will come that heaven and earth shall pass away, yet my word shall not pass away; but all shall be fulfilled.
24:37 And as I said before, After the tribulation of those days, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn.
24:38 And they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
24:39 And whoso treasureth up my words shall not be deceived.
24:40 For the Son of Man shall come, and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet; and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
24:41 Now learn a parable of the fig tree: When its branches are yet tender and it begins to put forth leaves, you know that summer is nigh at hand.
24:42 So likewise mine elect, when they shall see all these things, they shall know that he is near, even at the doors.
24:43 But of that day and hour no one knoweth; no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only.
24:44 But as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man.
24:45 For it shall be with them as it was in the days which were before the flood; for until the day that Noah entered into the ark, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.
24:46 Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, that in the last days,
24:47 Two shall be in the field; the one shall be taken and the other left.
24:48 Two shall be grinding at the mill; the one taken and the other left.
24:49 And what I say unto one, I say unto all men: Watch, therefore, for you know not at what hour your Lord doth come.
24:50 But know this, if the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched and would not have suffered his house to have been broken up, but would have been ready.
24:51 Therefore, be ye also ready; for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.
24:52 Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?
24:53 Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing;
24:54 And verily, I say unto you, He shall make him ruler over all his goods.
24:55 But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
24:56 And thus cometh the end of the wicked according to the prophecy of Moses, saying, They should be cut off from among the people. But the end of the earth is not yet, but by and by.
Chapter 25
Parable of the ten virgins--The talents--The judgment
25:1 And then, at that day before the Son of Man comes, the kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto ten virgins, who took their lamps and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
25:2 And five of them were wise, and five of them were foolish.
25:3 They that were foolish took their lamps and took no oil with them; but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
25:4 While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
25:5 And at midnight there was a cry made: Behold, the bridegroom cometh! Go ye out to meet him!
25:6 Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their lamps.
25:7 And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.
25:8 But the wise answered, saying, Lest there be not enough for us and you, go you rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
25:9 And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut.
25:10 Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us.
25:11 But he answered and said, Verily, I say unto you, You know me not.
25:12 Watch, therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh.
25:13 Now I will liken these things unto a parable.
25:14 For it is like as a man traveling into a far country, who called his own servants and delivered unto them his goods.
25:15 And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to every man according to his several ability, and straightway went on his journey.
25:16 Then he that had received the five talents went, and traded with the same, and gained other five talents.
25:17 And, likewise, he who received two talents, he also gained other two.
25:18 But he who had received one went, and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.
25:19 After a long time, the lord of those servants cometh and reckoneth with them.
25:20 And so he that had received the five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents; behold, I have gained, besides them, five talents more.
25:21 His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
25:22 He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents; behold, I have gained two talents besides them.
25:23 His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
25:24 Then he who had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee, that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown and gathering where thou hast not scattered.
25:25 And I was afraid, and went, and hid thy talent in the earth; and lo, here is thy talent; take it from me as thou hast from thine other servants, for it is thine.
25:26 His lord answered and said unto him, O wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not and gather where I have not scattered.
25:27 Having known this, therefore, thou oughtest to have put my money to the exchangers; and at my coming, I should have received mine own with usury.
25:28 I will take, therefore, the talent from you and give it unto him who hath ten talents.
25:29 For unto everyone who hath obtained other talents shall be given, and he shall have in abundance.
25:30 But from him that hath not obtained other talents shall be taken away even that which he hath received.
25:31 And his lord shall say unto his servants, Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
25:32 When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he shall sit upon the throne of his glory;
25:33 And before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth sheep from the goats: the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.
25:34 And he shall sit upon his throne, and the twelve apostles with him.
25:35 Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
25:36 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me;
25:37 I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me.
25:38 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee, or thirsty and gave thee drink?
25:39 When saw we thee a stranger and took thee in, or naked and clothed thee?
25:40 Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?
25:41 And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.
25:42 Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
25:43 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
25:44 I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
25:45 Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
25:46 Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily, I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not unto me.
25:47 And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
Chapter 26
The Lord's Supper--Christ betrayed
26:1 And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto his disciples,
26:2 Ye know that after two days is the passover, and then the Son of Man is betrayed to be crucified.
26:3 Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, and consulted that they might take Jesus by subtlety and kill him.
26:4 But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people.
26:5 Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, there came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head as he sat in the house.
26:6 But when some saw this, they had indignation, saying, Unto what purpose is this waste? For this ointment might have been sold for much and given to the poor.
26:7 When they had said thus, Jesus understood them; and he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? For she hath wrought a good work upon me.
26:8 For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.
26:9 For she hath poured this ointment on my body for my burial.
26:10 And in this thing that she hath done, she shall be blessed; for verily, I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, this thing that this woman hath done shall also be told for a memorial of her.
26:11 Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests and said, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.
26:12 And from that time he sought opportunity to betray Jesus.
26:13 Now on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, the disciples came unto Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?
26:14 And he said, Go into the city to such a man and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.
26:15 And the disciples did as Jesus appointed them; and they made ready the passover.
26:16 Now when the evening was come, he sat down with the twelve.
26:17 And as they did eat, he said, Verily, I say unto you that one of you shall betray me.
26:18 And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?
26:19 And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.
26:20 But the Son of Man goeth as it is written of him; but woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It had been good for that man if he had not been born.
26:21 Then Judas, who betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said.
26:22 And as they were eating, Jesus took bread and brake it, and blessed it, and gave to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is in remembrance of my body which I give a ransom for you.
26:23 And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it.
26:24 For this is in remembrance of my blood of the new testament, which is shed for as many as shall believe on my name, for the remission of their sins.
26:25 And I give unto you a commandment that ye shall observe to do the things which ye have seen me do and bear record of me even unto the end.
26:26 But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day when I shall come and drink it anew with you in my Father's kingdom.
26:27 And when they had sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.
26:28 Then said Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
26:29 But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.
26:30 Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, I will never be offended.
26:31 Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee that this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.
26:32 Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.
26:33 Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane and said unto the disciples, Sit ye here while I go yonder and pray.
26:34 And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.
26:35 Then said he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry ye here and watch with me.
26:36 And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
26:37 And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?
26:38 Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing; but the flesh is weak.
26:39 He went away again the second time and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.
26:40 And he came and found them asleep again; for their eyes were heavy.
26:41 And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.
26:42 Then cometh he to his disciples and saith unto them, Sleep on now and take rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
26:43 And after they had slept, he said unto them, Arise, and let us be going. Behold, he is at hand that doth betray me.
26:44 And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
26:45 Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; hold him fast.
26:46 And forthwith he came to Jesus and said, Hail, Master! and kissed him.
26:47 And Jesus said unto him, Judas, wherefore art thou come to betray me with a kiss?
26:48 Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.
26:49 And behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest, and smote off his ear.
26:50 Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into its place; for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
26:51 Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?
26:52 But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
26:53 In that same hour said Jesus unto the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief, with swords and staves, for to take me? I sat daily with you in the temple, teaching, and ye laid no hold on me.
26:54 But all this was done that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.
26:55 Then all the disciples forsook him and fled.
26:56 And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
26:57 But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest's palace, and went in, and sat with the servants to see the end.
26:58 Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death, but found none.
26:59 Yea, though many false witnesses came, they found none that could accuse him.
26:60 At the last came two false witnesses and said, This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of God and to build it in three days.
26:61 And the high priest arose and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? Knowest thou what these witness against thee?
26:62 But Jesus held his peace.
26:63 And the high priest answered and said unto him,
26:64 I adjure thee, by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.
26:65 Jesus said unto him, Thou hast said. Nevertheless, I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heaven.
26:66 Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy. What think ye?
26:67 They answered and said, He is guilty and worthy of death.
26:68 Then did they spit in his face and buffet him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ. Who is it that smote thee?
26:69 Now Peter sat without in the palace; and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.
26:70 But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.
26:71 And when he was gone out into the porch, another saw him and said unto them that were there, This man was also with Jesus of Nazareth.
26:72 And again he denied with an oath, saying, I do not know the man.
26:73 And after a while, came they that stood by and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them, for thy speech betrayeth thee.
26:74 Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man.
26:75 And immediately the cock crew.
26:76 And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which he said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out and wept bitterly.
Chapter 27
The crucifixion of Christ
27:1 When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus, to put him to death.
27:2 And when they had bound him, they led him away and delivered him to Pontius Pilate, the governor.
27:3 Then Judas, who had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
27:4 Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood.
27:5 And they said unto him, What is that to us? See thou to it; thy sins be upon thee.
27:6 And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went, and hanged himself on a tree. And straightway he fell down, and his bowels gushed out, and he died.
27:7 And the chief priests took the silver pieces and said, It is not lawful for to put them in the treasury because it is the price of blood.
27:8 And they took counsel and bought with them the potter's field to bury strangers in. Wherefore, that field was called the field of blood unto this day.
27:9 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy, the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value.
27:10 And, therefore, they took the pieces of silver and gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed by the mouth of Jeremy.
27:11 And Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews?
27:12 And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest truly; for thus it is written of me.
27:13 And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
27:14 Then saith Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?
27:15 And he answered him not to his questions; yea, never a word, insomuch that the governor marveled greatly.
27:16 Now at the feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would.
27:17 And they had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas.
27:18 Therefore, when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas or Jesus, which is called Christ?
27:19 For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.
27:20 When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things this day in a vision because of him.
27:21 But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas and destroy Jesus.
27:22 And the governor said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.
27:23 Pilate said unto them, What shall I do with Jesus, which is called Christ?
27:24 And all said unto him, Let him be crucified.
27:25 And the governor said, Why? What evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.
27:26 When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but rather that a tumult was made, he took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person; see that ye do nothing unto him.
27:27 Then answered all the people and said, His blood come upon us and our children.
27:28 Then released he Barabbas unto them; and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.
27:29 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall and gathered unto him the whole band.
27:30 And they stripped him and put on him a purple robe.
27:31 And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they bowed the knee before him, and they mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
27:32 And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.
27:33 And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.
27:34 And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name; him they compelled to bear his cross.
27:35 And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha (that is to say, a place of burial),
27:36 They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall; and when he had tasted the vinegar, he would not drink.
27:37 And they crucified him and parted his garments, casting lots, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots.
27:38 And sitting down, they watched him there.
27:39 And Pilate wrote a title and put it on the cross; and the writing was,
27:40 JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS, in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew.
27:41 And the chief priests said unto Pilate, It should be written and set up over his head, his accusation, This is he that said he was Jesus, the King of the Jews.
27:42 But Pilate answered and said, What I have written, I have written; let it alone.
27:43 Then were there two thieves crucified with him: one on the right hand, and another on the left.
27:44 And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads and saying, Thou that destroyest the temple and buildest it again in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.
27:45 Likewise, also the chief priests, mocking with the scribes and the elders, said, He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.
27:46 He trusted in God; let him deliver him now; if he will save him, let him save him; for he said, I am the Son of God.
27:47 One of the thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth. But the other rebuked him, saying, Dost thou not fear God, seeing thou art under the same condemnation? And this man is just and hath not sinned; and he cried unto the Lord that he would save him.
27:48 And the Lord said unto him, This day thou shalt be with me in paradise.
27:49 Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour.
27:50 And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani? (That is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?)
27:51 Some of them that stood there, when they heard him, said, This man calleth for Elias.
27:52 And straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.
27:53 The rest said, Let him be; let us see whether Elias will come to save him.
27:54 Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, saying, Father, it is finished, thy will is done, yielded up the ghost.
27:55 And behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;
27:56 And the graves were opened; and the bodies of the saints which slept, arose, who were many,
27:57 And came out of the graves after his resurrection, went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.
27:58 Now when the centurion and they that were with him, watching Jesus, heard the earthquake and saw those things which were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
27:59 And many women were there, beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him for his burial, among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children.
27:60 When the evening was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus' disciple; he went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.
27:61 Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.
27:62 And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock; and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher and departed.
27:63 And there was Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulcher.
27:64 Now the next day that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.
27:65 Command, therefore, that the sepulcher be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead; so this last imposture will be worse than the first.
27:66 Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch; go your way; make it as sure as you can.
27:67 So they went and made the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone and setting a watch.
Chapter 28
The resurrection of Christ--He sends forth his disciples to all nations
28:1 In the end of the Sabbath day, as it began to dawn towards the first day of the week, early in the morning came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulcher.
28:2 And behold, there had been a great earthquake; for two angels of the Lord descended from heaven, and came, and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.
28:3 And their countenance was like lightning, and their raiment white as snow; and for fear of them, the keepers did shake and became as though they were dead.
28:4 And the angels answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye; for we know that ye seek Jesus who was crucified.
28:5 He is not here; for he is risen, as he said. Come; see the place where the Lord lay; and go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him; lo, I have told you.
28:6 And they departed quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great joy, and did run to bring his disciples word.
28:7 And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail!
28:8 And they came, and held him by the feet, and worshiped him.
28:9 Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid; go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.
28:10 Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city and showed unto the chief priests all the things that were done.
28:11 And when they were assembled with the elders and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers,
28:12 Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night and stole him while we slept.
28:13 And if this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him and secure you.
28:14 So they took the money and did as they were taught; and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.
28:15 Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
28:16 And when they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted.
28:17 And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
28:18 Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
28:19 Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and, lo, I am with you always, unto the end of the world. Amen.

