Mark
His Testimony of Christ
Chapter 1
John's mission--He baptizes Jesus--Commencement of Jesus' ministry
1:1 The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as it is written in the prophets: Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
1:2 The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord; make his paths straight.
1:3 John did baptize in the wilderness and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.
1:4 And there went out unto him all the land of Judea and they of Jerusalem, and many were baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
1:5 And John was clothed with camels' hair and with a girdle of skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey, and preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.
1:6 I indeed have baptized you with water; but he shall not only baptize you with water, but with fire and the Holy Ghost.
1:7 And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized of John in Jordan.
1:8 And straightway, coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him;
1:9 And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And John bare record of it.
1:10 And immediately the Spirit took him into the wilderness.
1:11 And he was there in the wilderness forty days, Satan seeking to tempt him, and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.
1:12 Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God and saying,
1:13 The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye and believe the gospel.
1:14 And now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishers.
1:15 And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.
1:16 And straightway they forsook their nets and followed him.
1:17 And when he had gone a little farther thence, he saw James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets.
1:18 And he called them; and straightway they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.
1:19 And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the Sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught.
1:20 And they were astonished at his doctrine; for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.
1:21 And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee, who thou art, the Holy one of God.
1:22 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace and come out of him.
1:23 And when the unclean spirit had torn him and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.
1:24 And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? What new doctrine is this? For with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him.
1:25 And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the regions round about Galilee.
1:26 And, forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
1:27 And Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever; and they besought him for her.
1:28 And he came, and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she came and ministered unto them.
1:29 And at evening after sunset, they brought unto him all that were diseased and them that were possessed with devils; and all the city was gathered together at the door.
1:30 And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils, and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him.
1:31 And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.
1:32 And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.
1:33 And when they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for thee.
1:34 And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also; for, therefore, came I forth.
1:35 And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee and cast out devils.
1:36 And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and, kneeling down to him, said, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
1:37 And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and said unto him, I will; be thou clean.
1:38 And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
1:39 And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away; and said unto him, See thou say nothing to any man; but go thy way, show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.
1:40 But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in solitary places; and they came to him from every quarter.
Chapter 2
The preaching of Christ--The word confirmed by signs
2:1 And again, he entered into Capernaum after many days; and it was noised abroad that he was in the house.
2:2 And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room to receive the multitude, no, not so much as about the door; and he preached the word unto them.
2:3 And they came unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four persons.
2:4 And when they could not come nigh unto him, for the press, they uncovered the roof where he was; and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.
2:5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.
2:6 But there were certain of the scribes sitting there and reasoning in their hearts, Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God only?
2:7 And immediately, when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts? Is it not easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee, than to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk?
2:8 But that ye may know that the Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins, he said to the sick of the palsy, I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thy house.
2:9 And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all, insomuch that they were all amazed, and many glorified God, saying, We never saw the power of God after this manner.
2:10 And Jesus went forth again by the seaside, and all the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them.
2:11 And as he passed by, he saw Levi, the son of Alpheus, sitting at the place where they receive tribute as was customary in those days; and he said unto him, Follow me; and he arose and followed him.
2:12 And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with him and his disciples; for there were many, and they followed him.
2:13 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?
2:14 When Jesus heard this, he said unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick.
2:15 I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
2:16 And they came and said unto him, The disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast; and why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?
2:17 And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
2:18 But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.
2:19 No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment; else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse.
2:20 And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred; but new wine must be put into new bottles.
2:21 And it came to pass that he went through the cornfields on the Sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn.
2:22 And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do thy disciples on the Sabbath day that which is not lawful?
2:23 And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David did when he had need and was an hungered, he and they who were with him?
2:24 How he went into the house of God, in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the showbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him?
2:25 And he said unto them, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
2:26 Wherefore, the Sabbath was given unto man for a day of rest, and also that man should glorify God, and not that man should not eat;
2:27 For the Son of Man made the Sabbath day; therefore, the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath.
Chapter 3
Choosing of the Twelve--Sin against the Holy Ghost--The brethren of Christ
3:1 And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there which had a withered hand.
3:2 And they watched him to see whether he would heal him on the Sabbath day, that they might accuse him.
3:3 And he said unto the man which had a withered hand, Stand forth.
3:4 And he said unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their peace.
3:5 And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand.
3:6 And he stretched out his hand; and his hand was restored whole as the other.
3:7 And the Pharisees went forth and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.
3:8 But Jesus withdrew himself, with his disciples, to the sea; and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea, and from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they heard what great things he did, came unto him.
3:9 And he spake unto his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.
3:10 For he had healed many, insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him. As many as had plagues and unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.
3:11 And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.
3:12 And he goeth up into a mountain and calleth whom he would; and they came unto him.
3:13 And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils.
3:14 And Simon he surnamed Peter; and James, the son of Zebedee; and John, the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is the sons of thunder; and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James, the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon, the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him; and they went into a house.
3:15 And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread.
3:16 And when his friends heard him speak, they went out to lay hold on him; for they said, He is beside himself.
3:17 And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils he casteth out devils.
3:18 Now Jesus knew this, and he called them and said unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan? And if a kingdom be divided against itself, how can that kingdom stand?
3:19 And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. And if Satan rise up against himself and be divided, he cannot stand, but speedily hath an end.
3:20 No man can enter into a strong man's house and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his house.
3:21 And then came certain men unto him, accusing him, saying, Why do ye receive sinners, seeing thou makest thyself the Son of God?
3:22 But he answered them and said, Verily, I say unto you, All sins which men have committed, when they repent, shall be forgiven them; for I came to preach repentance unto the sons of men.
3:23 And blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall blaspheme, shall be forgiven them that come unto me and do the works which they see me do.
3:24 But there is a sin which shall not be forgiven. He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness; but he is in danger of being cut down out of the world. And they shall inherit eternal damnation.
3:25 And this he said unto them because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.
3:26 While he was yet with them, and while he was yet speaking, there came then some of his brethren and his mother, and standing without, sent unto him, calling unto him.
3:27 And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.
3:28 And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or who are my brethren?
3:29 And he looked round about on them which sat about him and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
3:30 For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.
Chapter 4
Parables of the sower and mustard seed--Jesus calms the sea
4:1 And he began again to teach by the seaside; and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land.
4:2 And he taught them many things by parables.
4:3 And he said unto them in his doctrine, Hearken; behold, there went out a sower to sow;
4:4 And it came to pass as he sowed, some fell by the wayside, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up.
4:5 And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and immediately it sprang up because it had no depth of earth; but when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.
4:6 And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it; and it yielded no fruit.
4:7 And other seed fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up, and increased, and brought forth, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some a hundred.
4:8 And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
4:9 And when he was alone with the twelve and they that believed in him, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable.
4:10 And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but unto them that are without, all things are done in parables,
4:11 That seeing, they may see and not perceive; and hearing, they may hear and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted and their sins should be forgiven them.
4:12 And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? And how then will ye know all parables?
4:13 The sower soweth the word.
4:14 And these are they by the wayside, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.
4:15 And these are they likewise which receive the word on stony ground, who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness, and have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time; and afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word's sake, immediately they are offended.
4:16 And these are they who receive the word among thorns, such as hear the word, and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word; and it becometh unfruitful.
4:17 And these are they who receive the word on good ground, such as hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some a hundred.
4:18 And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed, and not to be set on a candlestick? I say unto you, Nay;
4:19 For there is nothing hid which shall not be manifested; neither was anything kept secret, but that it should in due time come abroad. If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.
4:20 And he said unto them, Take heed what ye hear; for with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you; and unto you that continue to receive, shall more be given; for he that receiveth, to him shall be given; but he that continueth not to receive, from him shall be taken even that which he hath.
4:21 And he said, So is the kingdom of God; as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should sleep and rise, night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how;
4:22 For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself: first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.
4:23 But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle because the harvest is come.
4:24 And he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? Or with what comparison shall we compare it?
4:25 It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth; but when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches, so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it.
4:26 And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to bear; but without a parable spake he not unto them.
4:27 And when they were alone, he expounded all things unto his disciples.
4:28 And the same day, when the even was come, he said unto them, Let us pass over unto the other side.
4:29 And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him, even as he was, in the ship. And there were also with him other little ships.
4:30 And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat over into the ship; and he was in the hinder part of the ship asleep on a pillow; and they awoke him and said unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish?
4:31 And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace; be still; and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
4:32 And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no faith?
4:33 And they feared exceedingly and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?
Chapter 5
The unclean spirit at the tombs--Healing of Jairus' daughter
5:1 And they came over unto the other side of the sea into the country of the Gadarenes.
5:2 And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs, a man with an unclean spirit, who had been dwelling among the tombs.
5:3 And no man could bind him, no, not with chains; because that he had been often bound with fetters, and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces; neither could any man tame him.
5:4 And always, night and day, he was in the mountains and in the tombs, crying and cutting himself with stones.
5:5 But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran, and worshiped him, and cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. For he said unto him, Come out of the man, unclean spirit.
5:6 And he commanded him, saying, Declare thy name. And he answered, saying, My name is Legion; for we are many.
5:7 And he besought him much, that he would not send them away out of the country.
5:8 Now there was there, nigh unto the mountains, a great herd of swine feeding.
5:9 And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them. And forthwith Jesus gave them leave.
5:10 And the unclean spirits went out and entered into the swine; and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea (they were about two thousand) and were choked in the sea.
5:11 And they that fed the swine fled and told the people in the city and in the country all that was done unto the swine.
5:12 And they went out to see what it was that was done. And they came to Jesus and saw him that was possessed with the devil and had the Legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
5:13 And they that saw the miracle told them that came out, how it befell him that was possessed with the devil, and how the devil was cast out, and concerning the swine.
5:14 And they began immediately to pray him to depart out of their coasts.
5:15 And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil spoke to Jesus and prayed him that he might be with him.
5:16 Howbeit, Jesus suffered him not, but said unto him, Go home to thy friends and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee and hath had compassion on thee.
5:17 And he departed and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him; and all that heard him did marvel.
5:18 And when Jesus had passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto him; and he was nigh unto the sea.
5:19 And behold there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet and besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death; come and lay thy hands on her that she may be healed, and she shall live.
5:20 And he went with him; and much people followed him and thronged him.
5:21 And a certain woman--which had an issue of blood twelve years, and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse--when she had heard of Jesus, she came in the press behind and touched his garment; for she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole.
5:22 And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.
5:23 And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press and said, Who touched my clothes?
5:24 And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?
5:25 And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing; but the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came, and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
5:26 And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.
5:27 While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house, a man who said, Thy daughter is dead. Why troublest thou the Master any further?
5:28 As soon as he spake, Jesus heard the word that was spoken and said unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid; only believe.
5:29 And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John, the brother of James.
5:30 And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue and seeth the tumult and them that wept and wailed greatly.
5:31 And when he was come in, he said unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.
5:32 But when he had put them all out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying;
5:33 And he took the damsel by the hand and said unto her, Talitha cumi, which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise.
5:34 And straightway the damsel arose and walked; for she was twelve years old. And they were astonished with a great astonishment.
5:35 And he charged them straitly that no man should know it and commanded that something should be given her to eat.
Chapter 6
The Twelve called and sent out--Five loaves and two fishes
6:1 And he went out from thence and came into his own country; and his disciples followed him.
6:2 And when the Sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue; and many, hearing, were astonished at his words, saying, From whence hath this man these things?
6:3 And what wisdom is this that is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?
6:4 Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses, and of Judah and Simon?
6:5 And are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him.
6:6 But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house.
6:7 And he could do no mighty work there, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk and they were healed.
6:8 And he marveled because of their unbelief. And he went round about the villages, teaching.
6:9 And he called the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two, and gave them power over unclean spirits, and commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey save a staff only--no scrip, nor bread, nor money in their purse--but should be shod with sandals, and not take two coats.
6:10 And he said unto them, In whatsoever place ye enter into a house, there abide till ye depart from that place.
6:11 And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust of your feet for a testimony against them.
6:12 Verily, I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
6:13 And they went out and preached that men should repent.
6:14 And they cast out many devils and anointed with oil many that were sick, and they were healed.
6:15 And King Herod heard of Jesus; for his name was spread abroad; and he said that John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and, therefore, mighty works do show forth themselves in him.
6:16 Others said that it is Elias; and others said that it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.
6:17 But when Herod heard of him, he said, It is John whom I beheaded; he is risen from the dead.
6:18 For Herod himself had sent forth, and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife; for he had married her.
6:19 For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife.
6:20 Therefore, Herodias had a quarrel against him and would have killed him; but she could not.
6:21 For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and a holy man, and one who feared God and observed to worship him; and when he heard him, he did many things for him and heard him gladly.
6:22 But when Herod's birthday was come, he made a supper for his lords, high captains, and the chief priests of Galilee.
6:23 And when the daughter of Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it thee.
6:24 And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.
6:25 And she went forth and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.
6:26 And she came in straightway with haste unto the king and asked, saying, I will that thou give me, by and by, in a charger, the head of John the Baptist.
6:27 And the king was exceeding sorry; but for his oath's sake and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.
6:28 And immediately the king sent an executioner and commanded his head to be brought; and he went, and beheaded him in the prison,
6:29 And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel; and the damsel gave it to her mother.
6:30 And when John's disciples heard of it, they came, and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
6:31 Now the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus and told him all things, both what they had done and what they had taught.
6:32 And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a solitary place and rest a while; for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure, not so much as to eat.
6:33 And they departed into a solitary place by ship, privately.
6:34 And the people saw them departing; and many knew Jesus, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outran them, and came together unto him.
6:35 And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people and was moved with compassion towards them because they were as sheep not having a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.
6:36 And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him and said, This is a solitary place, and now the time for departure is come; send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread; for they have nothing to eat.
6:37 And he answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat.
6:38 And they said unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread and give them to eat?
6:39 He said unto them, How many loaves have ye? Go and see.
6:40 And when they knew, they said, Five, and two fishes.
6:41 And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass.
6:42 And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.
6:43 And when he had taken the five loaves and two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and broke the loaves, and gave to his disciples to set before the multitude; and the two fishes divided he among them all.
6:44 And they did all eat and were filled.
6:45 And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments and of the fishes.
6:46 And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men.
6:47 And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship and to go to the other side before him unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.
6:48 And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray.
6:49 And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land; and he saw them toiling in rowing, for the wind was contrary unto them.
6:50 And about the fourth watch of the night, he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea as if he would have passed by them.
6:51 And when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit and cried out;
6:52 For they all saw him and were troubled.
6:53 And immediately he talked with them and said unto them, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid.
6:54 And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased; and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure and wondered.
6:55 For they considered not of the loaves; for their hearts were hardened.
6:56 And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret and drew to the shore.
6:57 And when they were come out of the ship, straightway the people knew him, and ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was.
6:58 And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets and besought him that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment; and as many as touched him were made whole.
Chapter 7
What defiles a man--Syrophoenician woman's child healed
7:1 Then came together unto him, the Pharisees and certain of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem.
7:2 And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled (that is to say with unwashen) hands, they found fault.
7:3 For the Pharisees and all the Jews, except they wash hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.
7:4 And when they come from the market, except they wash their bodies, they eat not.
7:5 And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of tables.
7:6 And the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?
7:7 He answered and said unto them, Well hath Isaiah prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Howbeit, in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and commandments of men.
7:8 For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men: the washing of pots and of cups; and many other such like things ye do.
7:9 And he said unto them, Yea, altogether ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition.
7:10 Full well is it written of you by the prophets, whom ye have rejected.
7:11 They testified these things of a truth, and their blood shall be upon you.
7:12 Ye have kept not the ordinances of God; for Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother; and whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death of the transgressor, as it is written in your law; but ye keep not the law.
7:13 Ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me, he is of age. And ye suffer him no more to do aught for his father or his mother, making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered; and many such like things do ye.
7:14 And when he had called all the people, he said unto them, Hearken unto me, everyone, and understand;
7:15 There is nothing from without that, entering into a man, can defile him, which is food; but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man, that proceedeth forth out of the heart.
7:16 If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.
7:17 And when he was entered into the house from among the people, his disciples asked him concerning the parable.
7:18 And he said unto them, Are ye without understanding also? Do ye not perceive that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man cannot defile him; because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?
7:19 And he said, That which cometh out of a man defileth the man.
7:20 For from within, out of the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness;
7:21 All these evil things come from within and defile the man.
7:22 And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into a house, and would that no man should come unto him.
7:23 But he could not deny them, for he had compassion upon all men.
7:24 For a woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came, and fell at his feet.
7:25 The woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter.
7:26 But Jesus said unto her, Let the children of the kingdom first be filled; for it is not meet to take the children's bread and to cast it unto the dogs.
7:27 And she answered and said unto him, Yes, Lord, thou sayest truly; yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs.
7:28 And he said unto her, For this saying, go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter.
7:29 And when she was come to her house, she found that the devil had gone out, and her daughter was laid upon the bed.
7:30 And again, departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis.
7:31 And they brought unto him one that was deaf and had an impediment in his speech; and they besought him to put his hand upon him.
7:32 And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit and touched his tongue;
7:33 And looking up to heaven, he sighed and said unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
7:34 And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed; and he spake plain.
7:35 And he charged them that they should tell no man; but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published him,
7:36 And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well; he maketh both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.
Chapter 8
Jesus feeds a multitude--Heals a blind man--Teaches self-denial
8:1 In those days, the multitude being very great and having nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples and said unto them,
8:2 I have compassion on the multitude because they have now been with me three days and have nothing to eat; and if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the way; for divers of them came from afar.
8:3 And his disciples answered him, From whence can a man satisfy these, so great a multitude, with bread here in the wilderness?
8:4 And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.
8:5 And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground; and he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set before the people; and they did set them before the people.
8:6 And they had a few small fishes; and he blessed them and commanded to set them also before the people, that they should eat.
8:7 So they did eat and were filled; and they took up of the broken bread that was left, seven baskets.
8:8 And they that had eaten were about four thousand; and he sent them away.
8:9 And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
8:10 And the Pharisees came forth and began to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.
8:11 And he sighed deeply in his spirit and said, Why doth this generation seek after a sign?
8:12 Verily, I say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto this generation, save the sign of the prophet Jonah; for as Jonah was three days and three nights in the whale's belly, so likewise shall the Son of Man be buried in the bowels of the earth.
8:13 And he left them; and, entering into the ship again, he departed to the other side.
8:14 Now the multitude had forgotten to take bread; neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf.
8:15 And he charged them, saying, Take heed, and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.
8:16 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, He hath said this because we have no bread.
8:17 And when they said this among themselves, Jesus knew it; and he said unto them,
8:18 Why reason ye because ye have no bread? Perceive ye not yet, neither understand ye? Are your hearts yet hardened?
8:19 Having eyes, see ye not? And having ears, hear ye not? And do ye not remember?
8:20 When I brake the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They said unto him, Twelve.
8:21 And when the seven loaves among the four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven.
8:22 And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand?
8:23 And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to touch him.
8:24 And he took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the town; and when he had spit upon his eyes and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw aught?
8:25 And he looked up and said, I see men as trees walking.
8:26 After that he put his hands again upon his eyes and made him look up; and he was restored and saw every man clearly.
8:27 And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the town nor tell what is done to any in the town.
8:28 And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Caesarea Philippi; and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I am?
8:29 And they answered, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and others, One of the prophets.
8:30 And he said unto them, But whom say ye that I am?
8:31 And Peter answered and said unto him, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
8:32 And he charged them that they should tell no man of him.
8:33 And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and the chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.
8:34 And he spoke that saying openly. And Peter took him and began to rebuke him.
8:35 But when he had turned about and looked upon his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan; for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.
8:36 And when he had called the people, with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
8:37 For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; or whosoever will save his life, shall be willing to lay it down for my sake; and if he is not willing to lay it down for my sake, he shall lose it.
8:38 But whosoever shall be willing to lose his life for my sake, and the gospel's, the same shall save it.
8:39 For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
8:40 Therefore, deny yourselves of these, and be not ashamed of me.
8:41 Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
8:42 And they shall not have part in that resurrection when he cometh.
8:43 For verily, I say unto you that he shall come. And he that layeth down his life for my sake and the gospel's shall come with him and shall be clothed with his glory in the cloud, on the right hand of the Son of Man.
8:44 And he said unto them again, Verily, I say unto you that there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.
Chapter 9
Transfiguration--Elias--Offending members to be cut off
9:1 And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, and James, and John, who asked him many questions concerning his sayings; and Jesus leadeth them up into a high mountain apart by themselves. And he was transfigured before them.
9:2 And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow, so white as no fuller on earth could whiten them.
9:3 And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses, or in other words, John the Baptist and Moses; and they were talking with Jesus.
9:4 And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here; and let us make three tabernacles: one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias; for he knew not what to say; for they were sore afraid.
9:5 And there was a cloud that overshadowed them; and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son; hear him.
9:6 And suddenly, when they had looked round about with great astonishment, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only, with themselves. And immediately they departed.
9:7 And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen till the Son of Man was risen from the dead.
9:8 And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean.
9:9 And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must first come?
9:10 And he answered and told them, saying, Elias verily cometh first, and prepareth all things, and teacheth you of the prophets, how it is written of the Son of Man, that he must suffer many things and be set at naught.
9:11 Again I say unto you that Elias is indeed come; but they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, and even as it is written of him. And he bore record of me, and they received him not. Verily, this was Elias.
9:12 And when he came to the disciples, he saw a great multitude about them and the scribes questioning with them.
9:13 And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and, running to him, saluted him.
9:14 And Jesus asked the scribes, What questioned ye with them?
9:15 And one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit that is a devil; and when he seizeth him, he teareth him; and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away; and I spake to thy disciples that they might cast him out, and they could not.
9:16 Jesus spake unto him and said, O faithless generation! How long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring him unto me. And they brought him unto Jesus.
9:17 And when the man saw him, immediately he was torn by the spirit; and he fell on the ground and wallowed, foaming.
9:18 And Jesus asked his father, How long a time is it since this came unto him? And his father said, When a child;
9:19 And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire and into the waters to destroy him. But if thou canst, I ask thee to have compassion on us and help us.
9:20 Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt believe all things I shall say unto you, this is possible to him that believeth.
9:21 And immediately the father of the child cried out and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.
9:22 When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, I charge thee to come out of him and enter no more into him.
9:23 Now the dumb and deaf spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him; and he was as one dead, insomuch that many said, He is dead.
9:24 But Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up; and he arose.
9:25 When Jesus was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out?
9:26 And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing but by prayer and fasting.
9:27 And they departed thence and passed through Galilee privately; for he would not that any man should know it.
9:28 And he taught his disciples and said unto them, The Son of Man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day.
9:29 But they understood not that saying and were afraid to ask him.
9:30 And he came to Capernaum; and being in the house, he asked them, Why was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?
9:31 But they held their peace, being afraid; for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who was the greatest among them.
9:32 Now Jesus sat down, and called the twelve, and said unto them, If any man desire to be first, he shall be last of all and servant of all.
9:33 And he took a child and sat in the midst of them; and when he had taken the child in his arms, he said unto them,
9:34 Whosoever shall humble himself like one of these children and receiveth me, ye shall receive in my name.
9:35 And whosoever shall receive me receiveth not me only, but him that sent me, even the Father.
9:36 And John spake unto him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he followed not us; and we forbade him because he followed not us.
9:37 But Jesus said, Forbid him not; for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name that can speak evil of me. For he that is not against us is on our part.
9:38 And whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily, I say unto you, He shall not lose his reward.
9:39 And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he were cast into the sea.
9:40 Therefore, if thy hand offend thee, cut it off; or if thy brother offend thee, and confess not, and forsake not, he shall be cut off. It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than, having two hands, to go into hell.
9:41 For it is better for thee to enter into life without thy brother, than for thee and thy brother to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched.
9:42 And again, if thy foot offend thee, cut it off; for he that is thy standard, by whom thou walkest, if he become a transgressor, he shall be cut off.
9:43 It is better for thee to enter halt into life, than, having two feet, to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched.
9:44 Therefore, let every man stand or fall by himself and not for another, or not trusting another.
9:45 Seek unto my Father, and it shall be done in that very moment what ye shall ask, if ye ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive.
9:46 And if thine eye which seeth for thee, him that is appointed to watch over thee to show thee light, become a transgressor and offend thee, pluck him out.
9:47 It is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than, having two eyes, to be cast into hellfire.
9:48 For it is better that thyself should be saved, than to be cast into hell with thy brother, where their worm dieth not and where the fire is not quenched.
9:49 For everyone shall be salted with fire; and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt; but the salt must be good.
9:50 For if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it (the sacrifice)? Therefore, it must needs be that ye have salt in yourselves and have peace one with another.
Chapter 10
Divorce--Blessing of children--Deceitfulness of riches--Reward of the saints--Self-denial and self-exaltation--Blind Bartimeus
10:1 And he arose from thence and cometh into the coasts of Judea by the farther side of Jordan; and the people resorted unto him again; and as he was accustomed to teach, he also taught them again.
10:2 And the Pharisees came to him and asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? This they said, thinking to tempt him.
10:3 And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you?
10:4 And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement and to put her away.
10:5 Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your hearts he wrote you this precept;
10:6 But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and female.
10:7 For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh; so then they are no more twain, but one flesh; what therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.
10:8 And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter.
10:9 And he said unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife and marry another committeth adultery against her.
10:10 And if a woman shall put away her husband and be married to another, she committeth adultery.
10:11 And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them; and the disciples rebuked those that brought them.
10:12 But when Jesus saw and heard them, he was much displeased and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of God.
10:13 Verily, I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.
10:14 And he took them up in his arms, and put his hands upon them, and blessed them.
10:15 And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
10:16 And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? None is good but one; that is God.
10:17 Thou knowest the commandments: Do not commit adultery; do not kill; do not steal; do not bear false witness; defraud not; honor thy father and mother.
10:18 And the man answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth.
10:19 Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him and said unto him, One thing thou lackest;
10:20 Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor; and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, take up the cross, and follow me.
10:21 And the man was sad at that saying and went away grieved; for he had great possessions.
10:22 And Jesus looked round about and said unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of my Father!
10:23 And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus spake again and said unto them, Children, how hard is it for them who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God!
10:24 It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
10:25 And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?
10:26 And Jesus, looking upon them, said, With men that trust in riches, it is impossible, but not impossible with men who trust in God and leave all for my sake; for with such, all these things are possible.
10:27 Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all and have followed thee.
10:28 And Jesus answered and said, Verily, I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and the gospel's,
10:29 But he shall receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come, eternal life.
10:30 But there are many who make themselves first that shall be last, and the last first.
10:31 This he said, rebuking Peter; and they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before, and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid.
10:32 And he took again the twelve and began to tell them what things should happen unto him.
10:33 And Jesus said, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of Man shall be delivered unto the chief priests and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death and shall deliver him to the Gentiles.
10:34 And they shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him; and the third day he shall rise again.
10:35 And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came unto him, saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire.
10:36 And he said unto them, What will ye that I should do unto you?
10:37 They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand and the other on thy left hand in thy glory.
10:38 But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask. Can ye drink of the cup that I drink of and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
10:39 And they said unto him, We can.
10:40 And Jesus said unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but they shall receive it for whom it is prepared.
10:41 And when the ten heard, they began to be much displeased with James and John.
10:42 But Jesus called them and said unto them, Ye know that they who are appointed to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them.
10:43 But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you shall be your minister.
10:44 And whosoever of you will be the chiefest shall be servant of all.
10:45 For even the Son of Man came, not to be ministered unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many.
10:46 And they came to Jericho; and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, sat by the highway side begging.
10:47 And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.
10:48 And many charged him that he should hold his peace; but he cried the more exceedingly, saying, Son of David, have mercy on me.
10:49 And Jesus stood still and commanded him to be called. And they called the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort; arise; he calleth thee.
10:50 And he, casting away his garment, arose and came to Jesus.
10:51 And Jesus said unto him, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee?
10:52 And the blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight.
10:53 And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole.
10:54 And immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus in the way.
Chapter 11
Christ enters Jerusalem--Drives out moneychangers--Teaches forgiveness
11:1 And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples and said unto them,
11:2 Go your way into the village over against you; and as soon as ye have entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon no man ever sat; loose him and bring him to me.
11:3 And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither.
11:4 And they went their way and found the colt tied by the door without, in a place where two ways met; and they loosed him.
11:5 And certain of them who stood by said unto the disciples, Why loose ye the colt?
11:6 And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded; and they let them go.
11:7 And they brought the colt to Jesus and cast their garments on it; and Jesus sat upon it.
11:8 And many spread their garments in the way; and others cut down branches of trees and strewed them in the way.
11:9 And they that went before him and they that followed after cried, saying,
11:10 Hosanna! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord;
11:11 That bringeth the kingdom of our father David;
11:12 Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest!
11:13 And Jesus entered into Jerusalem and into the temple. And when he had looked round about upon all things and blessed the disciples, the eventide was come; and he went out unto Bethany with the twelve.
11:14 And on the morrow when they came from Bethany, he was hungry; and, seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came to it with his disciples; and as they supposed, he came to it to see if he might find anything thereon.
11:15 And when he came to it, there was nothing but leaves; for as yet the figs were not ripe.
11:16 And Jesus spake and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter, forever. And his disciples heard him.
11:17 And they came to Jerusalem. And Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers and the seats of them who sold doves,
11:18 And would not suffer that any man should carry a vessel through the temple.
11:19 And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? But ye have made it a den of thieves.
11:20 And the scribes and chief priests heard him and sought how they might destroy him; for they feared him because all the people were astonished at his doctrine.
11:21 And when even was come, he went out of the city.
11:22 And in the morning as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots.
11:23 And Peter, calling to remembrance, said unto him, Master, behold the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away.
11:24 And Jesus spake and said unto him, Have faith in God.
11:25 For verily, I say unto you that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he saith fulfilled.
11:26 Therefore, I say unto you, Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive, and ye shall have whatsoever ye ask.
11:27 And when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have aught against any, that your Father also who is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.
11:28 But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father who is in heaven forgive your trespasses.
11:29 And they came again to Jerusalem; and as he was walking in the temple, there came to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders and said unto him,
11:30 By what authority doest thou these things, and who gave thee this authority to do these things?
11:31 And Jesus answered and said unto them, I will also ask of you one question; answer me, and then I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
11:32 Was the baptism of John from heaven, or of men? Answer me.
11:33 And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven, he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?
11:34 But if we shall say, Of men, we shall offend the people. Therefore they feared the people; for all people believed John, that he was a prophet indeed.
11:35 And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell.
11:36 And Jesus, answering, said unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
Chapter 12
Parable of the vineyard--Tribute money--Marriage in the resurrection--The great commandment--The widow's mite
12:1 And Jesus began to speak unto them by parables, saying,
12:2 A man planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged the wine vat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.
12:3 And at the season, he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.
12:4 And they caught the servant, and beat him, and sent him away empty.
12:5 And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully handled.
12:6 And again he sent another, and him they killed; and many others, beating some and killing some.
12:7 Having yet therefore one son, his well beloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son.
12:8 But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.
12:9 And they took him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
12:10 What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? Lo, he will come, and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.
12:11 Again, have ye not read this scripture: The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner; this was the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.
12:12 And now they were angry when they heard these words; and they sought to lay hold on him, but feared the people;
12:13 For they knew that he had spoken the parable against them; and they left him and went their way.
12:14 And they sent unto him certain of the Pharisees and Herodians to catch him in his words.
12:15 And when they were come, they said unto him, Master, we know that thou art true and carest for no man; for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth.
12:16 Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give?
12:17 But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? Bring me a penny that I may see it.
12:18 And they brought the penny; and he said unto them, Whose image and superscription is this?
12:19 And they said unto him, Caesar's.
12:20 And Jesus, answering, said unto them, Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.
12:21 And they marveled at it.
12:22 Then came unto him the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection and they asked him, saying,
12:23 Master, Moses wrote unto us in his law, If a man's brother die, and leave a wife, and leave no children, that his brother should take his wife and raise up seed unto his brother.
12:24 Now there were seven brethren; the first took a wife, and dying left no seed.
12:25 And the second took her and died; neither left he any seed; and the third likewise.
12:26 And the seven had her and left no seed; last of all, the woman died also.
12:27 In the resurrection, therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them; for the seven had her to wife?
12:28 And Jesus, answering, said unto them, Ye do err, therefore, because ye know not and understand not the scriptures, neither the power of God.
12:29 For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God who are in heaven.
12:30 And as touching the dead, that they rise: Have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush, God spake unto him, saying,
12:31 I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
12:32 He is not, therefore, the God of the dead, but the God of the living; for he raiseth them up out of their graves. Ye, therefore, do greatly err.
12:33 And one of the scribes came and, having heard them reasoning together and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which is the first commandment of all?
12:34 And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments is: Hearken and hear, O Israel; the Lord, our God, is one Lord;
12:35 And thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength.
12:36 This is the first commandment. And the second is like this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these.
12:37 And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said the truth; for there is one God, and there is none other but him.
12:38 And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
12:39 And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.
12:40 And no man after that durst ask him, saying, Who art thou?
12:41 And Jesus spake and said, while he taught in the temple, How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David?
12:42 For David himself said by the Holy Ghost, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
12:43 David therefore himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he his son?
12:44 And the common people heard him gladly; but the high priest and the elders were offended at him.
12:45 And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, who love to go in long clothing, and have salutations in the market places, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts;
12:46 Who devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; these shall receive greater damnation.
12:47 And after this, Jesus sat over against the treasury and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury; and many who were rich cast in much.
12:48 And there came a certain poor widow, and she cast in two mites, which make a farthing.
12:49 And Jesus called his disciples and said unto them, Verily, I say unto you that this poor widow hath cast more in than all they who have cast into the treasury;
12:50 For all the rich did cast in of their abundance; but she, notwithstanding her want, did cast in all that she had, yea, even all her living.
Chapter 13
Destruction of Jerusalem--Christ's second coming
13:1 And as Jesus went out of the temple, his disciples came to him for to hear him, saying, Master, show us concerning the buildings of the temple.
13:2 And he said unto them, Behold ye these stones of the temple, and all this great work, and buildings of the temple?
13:3 Verily, I say unto you, They shall be thrown down and left unto the Jews desolate.
13:4 And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things, and do ye not understand them?
13:5 Verily, I say unto you, There shall not be left here upon this temple one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down.
13:6 And Jesus left them and went upon the mount of Olives.
13:7 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying,
13:8 Tell us when shall these things be which thou hast said, concerning the destruction of the temple and the Jews?
13:9 And what is the sign of thy coming and of the end of the world (or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world)?
13:10 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.
13:11 Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.
13:12 And then shall many be offended and shall betray one another; and many false prophets shall arise and shall deceive many;
13:13 And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.
13:14 When ye, therefore, shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, then ye shall stand in the holy place. (Whoso readeth let him understand.)
13:15 Then let them who be in Judea flee into the mountains;
13:16 And let him who is on the housetop flee and not return to take anything out of his house;
13:17 Neither let him who is in the field return back to take his clothes.
13:18 And woe unto them who are with child and unto them who give suck in those days.
13:19 Therefore, pray ye the Lord that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day.
13:20 For then, in those days, shall be great tribulation on the Jews and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, such as was not before sent upon Israel, of God, since the beginning of their kingdom (for it is written their enemies shall scatter them) until this time; no, nor ever shall be sent again upon Israel.
13:21 All these things are the beginning of sorrows.
13:22 And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved; but for the elect's sake, according to the covenant, those days shall be shortened.
13:23 Behold, these things I have spoken unto you concerning the Jews.
13:24 And then immediately after the tribulation of those days, which shall come upon Jerusalem, if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe him not.
13:25 For in those days there shall also arise false christs and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant.
13:26 Behold, I speak these things unto you for the elect's sake.
13:27 And ye also shall hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that ye be not troubled; for all I have told you must come to pass, but the end is not yet.
13:28 Behold, I have told you before, Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth, or, Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.
13:29 For as the light of the morning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, and covereth the whole earth, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.
13:30 And now I show unto you a parable. Behold, wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together;
13:31 So, likewise, shall mine elect be gathered from the four quarters of the earth.
13:32 And they shall hear of wars and rumors of wars. Behold, I speak unto you for mine elect's sake.
13:33 For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom;
13:34 There shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers places.
13:35 And again, because iniquity shall abound, the love of men shall wax cold; but he who shall not be overcome, the same shall be saved.
13:36 And again, this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked.
13:37 And again, shall the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet be fulfilled.
13:38 And immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
13:39 Verily, I say unto you, This generation in which these things shall be shown forth shall not pass away till all I have told you shall be fulfilled.
13:40 Although the days will come that heaven and earth shall pass away, yet my words shall not pass away, but all shall be fulfilled.
13:41 And as I said before, After the tribulation of those days, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven; and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn;
13:42 And they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
13:43 And whoso treasureth up my word shall not be deceived.
13:44 For the Son of Man shall come; and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
13:45 Now learn a parable of the fig tree: When his branches are yet tender and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh at hand.
13:46 So likewise, mine elect, when they shall see all these things, they shall know that he is near, even at the doors.
13:47 But of that day and hour no one knoweth, no, not the angels of God in heaven, but my Father only.
13:48 But as it was in the days of Noah, so it shall be also at the coming of the Son of Man; for it shall be with them as it was in the days which were before the flood.
13:49 Until the day that Noah entered into the ark, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.
13:50 Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, that in the last days, two shall be in the field; one shall be taken and the other left.
13:51 Two shall be grinding at the mill; the one taken, and the other left.
13:52 And what I say unto one, I say unto all men.
13:53 Watch, therefore, for ye know not at what hour your Lord doth come.
13:54 But know this, if the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to have been broken up, but would have been ready.
13:55 Therefore, be ye also ready; for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.
13:56 Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?
13:57 Blessed is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing.
13:58 And verily, I say unto you, He shall make him ruler over all his goods.
13:59 But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken,
13:60 The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.
13:61 There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; and thus cometh the end.
Chapter 14
Christ anointed by a woman--Passover--Christ's betrayal
14:1 After two days was the passover and the feast of unleavened bread.
14:2 And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take Jesus by craft and put him to death.
14:3 But they said among themselves, Let us not take him on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people.
14:4 And Jesus, being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard, very precious; and she brake the box and poured the ointment on his head.
14:5 There were some among the disciples who had indignation within themselves and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence and have been given to the poor. And they murmured against her.
14:6 And Jesus said unto them, Let her alone. Why trouble ye her? For she hath wrought a good work on me.
14:7 Ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will, ye may do them good; but me ye have not always.
14:8 She has done what she could, and this which she has done unto me shall be had in remembrance in generations to come, wheresoever my gospel shall be preached; for verily, she has come beforehand to anoint my body to the burying.
14:9 Verily, I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, what she hath done shall be spoken of also for a memorial of her.
14:10 And now, the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?
14:11 And he sendeth forth two of his disciples and said unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water; follow him;
14:12 And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the good man of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guest chamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?
14:13 And he will show you a large upper room, furnished and prepared; there make ready for us.
14:14 And his disciples went forth and came into the city and found as he had said unto them; and they made ready the passover.
14:15 And in the evening he cometh with the twelve.
14:16 And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily, I say unto you, One of you who eateth with me shall betray me.
14:17 And they all began to be very sorrowful and began to say unto him, one by one, Is it I? And another said, Is it I?
14:18 And he answered and said unto them, It is one of the twelve who dippeth with me in the dish.
14:19 The Son of Man indeed goeth as it is written of him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! Good were it for that man if he had never been born.
14:20 And as they did eat, Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them, and said, Take it and eat.
14:21 Behold, this is for you to do in remembrance of my body; for as oft as ye do this, ye will remember this hour that I was with you.
14:22 And he took the cup; and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them; and they all drank of it.
14:23 And he said unto them, This is in remembrance of my blood which is shed for many, and the new testament which I give unto you; for of me ye shall bear record unto all the world.
14:24 And as oft as ye do this ordinance, ye will remember me in this hour that I was with you and drank with you of this cup, even the last time in my ministry.
14:25 Verily, I say unto you, Of this ye shall bear record; for I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine with you until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.
14:26 And now they were grieved and wept over him.
14:27 And when they had sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.
14:28 And Jesus said unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night; for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.
14:29 But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee.
14:30 And he said unto Judas Iscariot, What thou doest, do quickly; but beware of innocent blood.
14:31 Nevertheless, Judas Iscariot, even one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests to betray Jesus unto them; for he turned away from him and was offended because of his words.
14:32 And when the chief priests heard of him, they were glad and promised to give him money; and he sought how he might conveniently betray Jesus.
14:33 But Peter said unto Jesus, Although all men shall be offended with thee, yet I will never be offended.
14:34 And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee that this day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.
14:35 But he spake the more vehemently: If I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all.
14:36 And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane, which was a garden; and the disciples began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and to complain in their hearts, wondering if this be the Messiah.
14:37 And Jesus, knowing their hearts, said to his disciples, Sit ye here while I shall pray.
14:38 And he taketh with him Peter, and James, and John, and rebuked them, and said unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry ye here and watch.
14:39 And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.
14:40 And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me; nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done.
14:41 And he cometh and findeth them sleeping, and said unto Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? Couldest not thou watch one hour?
14:42 Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.
14:43 And they said unto him, The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak.
14:44 And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.
14:45 And when he returned, he found them asleep again, for their eyes were heavy; neither knew they what to answer him.
14:46 And he cometh to them the third time and said unto them, Sleep on now and take rest; it is enough; the hour is come; behold, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
14:47 And after they had finished their sleep, he said, Rise up; let us go; lo, he who betrayeth me is at hand.
14:48 And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders.
14:49 And he who betrayed him had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away safely.
14:50 And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him and said, Master, Master, and kissed him.
14:51 And they laid their hands on him and took him.
14:52 And one of them, who stood by, drew his sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.
14:53 But Jesus commanded him to return his sword, saying, He who taketh the sword shall perish with the sword. And he put forth his finger and healed the servant of the high priest.
14:54 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out as against a thief, with swords and staves to take me?
14:55 I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not; but the scriptures must be fulfilled.
14:56 And the disciples, when they heard this saying, all forsook him and fled.
14:57 And there followed him a certain young man, a disciple, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him; and he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked, and saved himself out of their hands.
14:58 And they led Jesus away to the high priest; and with him were assembled all the chief priests, and the elders, and the scribes.
14:59 And Peter followed him afar off, even unto the palace of the high priest; and he sat with the servants and warmed himself at the fire.
14:60 And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus, to put him to death, but found none,
14:61 Though many bare false witness against him; yet their witness agreed not together.
14:62 And there arose certain men and bare false witness against him, saying, We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands;
14:63 But neither did their witness agree together.
14:64 And the high priest stood up in the midst and asked Jesus, saying,
14:65 Answerest thou nothing? Knowest thou not what these witness against thee?
14:66 But he held his peace and answered nothing.
14:67 Again the high priest asked him and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?
14:68 And Jesus said, I am; and ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heaven.
14:69 Then the high priest rent his clothes and said, What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard the blasphemy. What think ye?
14:70 And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.
14:71 And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy;
14:72 And the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands.
14:73 And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest,
14:74 And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him and said, Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.
14:75 But he denied, saying, I know not; neither understand I what thou sayest.
14:76 And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.
14:77 And a maid saw him again and began to say to them who stood by, This is one of them.
14:78 And he denied it again.
14:79 And a little after, they who stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them; for thou art a Galilean; thy speech agreeth thereto. But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.
14:80 And the second time the cock crew;
14:81 And Peter called to mind the words which Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.
14:82 And he went out, and fell upon his face, and wept bitterly.
Chapter 15
Christ's trial, crucifixion, and burial
15:1 And straightway in the morning, the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes;
15:2 And the whole council condemned him, and bound him, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate.
15:3 And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews?
15:4 And Jesus answering, said unto him, I am, even as thou sayest.
15:5 And the chief priests accused him of many things; but he answered nothing.
15:6 And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? Behold how many things they witness against thee.
15:7 But Jesus yet answered nothing, so that Pilate marveled.
15:8 Now it was common at the feast for Pilate to release unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired.
15:9 And there was a man named Barabbas, bound with them who had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection.
15:10 And the multitude, crying aloud, began to desire him to deliver Jesus unto them.
15:11 But Pilate answered unto them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?
15:12 For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.
15:13 But the chief priests moved the people that he should rather release Barabbas unto them, as he had before done unto them.
15:14 And Pilate spake again and said unto them, What will ye then that I shall do with him whom ye call the King of the Jews?
15:15 And they cried out again, Deliver him unto us to be crucified. Away with him! Crucify him!
15:16 Then Pilate said unto them, Why? What evil hath he done?
15:17 But they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him!
15:18 And now Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.
15:19 And the soldiers led him away into the hall called Praetorium; and they called together the whole band;
15:20 And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it upon his head,
15:21 And began to salute him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
15:22 And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and, bowing their knees, worshiped him.
15:23 And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.
15:24 And they compelled one Simon, a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.
15:25 And they brought him unto the place called Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a burial.
15:26 And they gave him to drink, vinegar mingled with gall; and when he had tasted the vinegar, he would not drink.
15:27 And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.
15:28 And it was the third hour when they crucified him.
15:29 And Pilate wrote his accusation and put it upon the cross: THE KING OF THE JEWS.
15:30 There were certain of the chief priests, who stood by, that said unto Pilate, Write that he said, I am the King of the Jews.
15:31 But Pilate said unto them, What I have written, I have written.
15:32 And with him they crucified two thieves, the one on his right hand, the other on his left.
15:33 And the scripture was fulfilled which said, And he was numbered with the transgressors.
15:34 And they who passed by railed on him, wagging their heads and saying, Ah, thou who destroyest the temple and buildest it in three days, save thyself and come down from the cross.
15:35 Likewise also, the chief priests, mocking, said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save.
15:36 Let Christ, the King of Israel, descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe.
15:37 And one of them who was crucified with him reviled him also, saying, If thou art the Christ, save thyself and us.
15:38 And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
15:39 And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani, which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
15:40 And some of them who stood by, when they heard him, said, Behold, he calleth Elias.
15:41 And one ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink; others spake, saying, Let him alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down.
15:42 And Jesus cried with a loud voice and gave up the ghost.
15:43 And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom.
15:44 And when the centurion, who stood over against him, saw that he so cried out and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly, this man is the Son of God.
15:45 There were also women looking on afar off, among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome, who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him and ministered unto him, and many other women who came with him unto Jerusalem.
15:46 And now, when the even was come, because it was the preparation day, that is the day before the Sabbath,
15:47 Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable counselor who also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus. And Pilate marveled and asked him if he were already dead.
15:48 And calling the centurion, he asked him if he had been any while dead.
15:49 And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
15:50 And Joseph bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulcher which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulcher.
15:51 And Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Joses, beheld where he was laid.
Chapter 16
Christ's resurrection--Great commission given
16:1 And when the Sabbath was passed, Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James, and Salome bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him.
16:2 And very early in the morning, the first day of the week, they came unto the sepulcher at the rising of the sun; and they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulcher?
16:3 But when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away (for it was very great) and two angels sitting thereon, clothed in long white garments; and they were affrighted.
16:4 But the angels said unto them, Be not affrighted; ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified. He is risen; he is not here. Behold the place where they laid him,
16:5 And go your way. Tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall you see him as he said unto you.
16:6 And they, entering into the sepulcher, saw the place where they laid Jesus.
16:7 And they went out quickly and fled from the sepulcher; for they trembled and were amazed; neither said they anything to any man, for they were afraid.
16:8 Now when Jesus was risen, early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.
16:9 And she went and told them who had been with him, as they mourned and wept.
16:10 And they, when they heard that he was alive and had been seen of her, believed not.
16:11 After that, he appeared in another form unto two of them as they walked and went into the country;
16:12 And they went and told it unto the residue; neither believed they them.
16:13 Afterward, he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them who had seen him after he was risen.
16:14 And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.
16:15 He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.
16:16 And these signs shall follow them that believe:
16:17 In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
16:18 They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them;
16:19 They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
16:20 So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven and sat on the right hand of God.
16:21 And they went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them and confirming the word, with signs following. Amen.

