Genesis
Chapter 1
History of creation
1:1 And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, I reveal unto you concerning this heaven and this earth; write the words which I speak.
1:2 I am the Beginning and the End, the Almighty God. By mine Only Begotten I created these things.
1:3 Yea, in the beginning I created the heaven and the earth upon which thou standest.
1:4 And the earth was without form and void; and I caused darkness to come up upon the face of the deep.
1:5 And my Spirit moved upon the face of the waters, for I am God.
1:6 And I, God, said, Let there be light; and there was light.
1:7 And I, God, saw the light, and that light was good. And I, God, divided the light from the darkness.
1:8 And I, God, called the light day, and the darkness I called night. And this I did by the word of my power; and it was done as I spake. And the evening and the morning were the first day.
1:9 And again, I, God, said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters; and it was so, even as I spake. And I said, Let it divide the waters from the waters; and it was done.
1:10 And I, God, made the firmament and divided the waters, yea, the great waters under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament; and it was so, even as I spake.
1:11 And I, God, called the firmament heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.
1:12 And I, God, said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place; and it was so. And I, God, said, Let there be dry land; and it was so.
1:13 And I, God, called the dry land earth; and the gathering together of the waters called I the sea.
1:14 And I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good.
1:15 And I, God, said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself upon the earth; and it was so, even as I spake.
1:16 And the earth brought forth grass, every herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed should be in itself after his kind.
1:17 And I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good. And the evening and the morning were the third day.
1:18 And I, God, said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and for years, and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth; and it was so.
1:19 And I, God, made two great lights: the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night; and the greater light was the sun, and the lesser light was the moon.
1:20 And the stars also were made, even according to my word; and I, God, set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth--and the sun to rule over the day, and the moon to rule over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness.
1:21 And I, God, saw that all things which I had made were good. And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
1:22 And I, God, said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly, the moving creature that hath life, and fowl which may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
1:23 And I, God, created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind.
1:24 And I, God, saw that all things which I had created were good; and I, God, blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the sea, and let fowl multiply in the earth. And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
1:25 And I, God, said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind: cattle and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after their kind; and it was so.
1:26 And I, God, made the beasts of the earth after their kind, and cattle after their kind, and everything which creepeth upon the earth after his kind. And I, God, saw that all these things were good.
1:27 And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and it was so.
1:28 And I, God, said, Let them have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
1:29 And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them.
1:30 And I, God, blessed them and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
1:31 And I, God, said unto man, Behold, I have given you every herb, bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in the which shall be the fruit of a tree, yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.
1:32 And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein I grant life, there shall be given every clean herb for meat; and it was so, even as I spake.
1:33 And I, God, saw everything that I had made; and behold, all things which I had made were very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.
Chapter 2
History of creation continued--God rests--Adam warned--Eve created
2:1 Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
2:2 And on the seventh day, I, God, ended my work and all things which I had made; and I rested on the seventh day from all my work; and all things which I had made were finished. And I, God, saw that they were good.
2:3 And I, God, blessed the seventh day and sanctified it because that in it I had rested from all my work, which I, God, had created and made.
2:4 And now, behold, I say unto you that these are the generations of the heaven and of the earth when they were created in the day that I, the Lord God, made the heaven and the earth, and every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew;
2:5 For I, the Lord God, created all things of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth; for I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth.
2:6 And I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them, and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air;
2:7 But I, the Lord God, spake, and there went up a mist from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground.
2:8 And I, the Lord God, formed man from the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul--the first flesh upon the earth, the first man also.
2:9 Nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made, according to my word.
2:10 And I, the Lord God, planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there I put the man whom I had formed.
2:11 And out of the ground, made I, the Lord God, to grow every tree, naturally, that is pleasant to the sight of man; and man could behold it, and it became also a living soul; for it was spiritual in the day that I created it; for it remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it, yea, even all things which I prepared for the use of man; and man saw that it was good for food.
2:12 And I, the Lord God, planted the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and also the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
2:13 And I, the Lord God, caused a river to go out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted and became into four heads.
2:14 And I, the Lord God, called the name of the first Pison, and it compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where I, the Lord, created much gold; and the gold of that land was good, and there was bdellium and the onyx stone.
2:15 And the name of the second river was called Gihon, the same that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.
2:16 And the name of the third river was Hiddekel, that which goeth toward the east of Assyria.
2:17 And the fourth river was Euphrates.
2:18 And I, the Lord God, took the man and put him into the garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it.
2:19 And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat;
2:20 But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it;
2:21 Nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but remember that I forbid it;
2:22 For in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
2:23 And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, that it was not good that the man should be alone;
2:24 Wherefore, I will make a help meet for him.
2:25 And out of the ground, I, the Lord God, formed every beast of the field and every fowl of the air and commanded that they should come unto Adam to see what he would call them.
2:26 And they were also living souls; for I, God, breathed into them the breath of life and commanded that whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that should be the name thereof.
2:27 And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but as for Adam, there was not found a help meet for him.
2:28 And I, the Lord God, caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept; and I took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh in the stead thereof; and the rib, which I, the Lord God, had taken from man, made I a woman and brought her unto the man.
2:29 And Adam said, This I know now is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called woman because she was taken out of man.
2:30 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh.
2:31 And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
Chapter 3
Satan rebels--The Son submits to the Father--Satan cast down--Man's agency, temptation, and fall--Adam and Eve driven out of the garden
3:1 And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying, That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning;
3:2 And he came before me, saying, Behold I; send me. I will be thy Son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost; and surely I will do it. Wherefore, give me thine honor.
3:3 But behold, my beloved Son, which was my beloved and chosen from the beginning, said unto me, Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever.
3:4 Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also that I should give unto him mine own power, by the power of mine Only Begotten I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan,
3:5 Yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive, and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice.
3:6 And now, the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which I, the Lord God, had made.
3:7 And Satan put it into the heart of the serpent--for he had drawn away many after him, and he sought also to beguile Eve--for he knew not the mind of God; wherefore, he sought to destroy the world.
3:8 And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden. And he spake by the mouth of the serpent.
3:9 And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which thou beholdest in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it; neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
3:10 And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die; for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
3:11 And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it became pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make her wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
3:12 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they had been naked; and they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves aprons.
3:13 And they heard the voice of the Lord God as they were walking in the garden in the cool of the day.
3:14 And Adam and his wife went to hide themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.
3:15 And I, the Lord God, called unto Adam and said unto him, Where goest thou? And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid because I beheld that I was naked; and I hid myself.
3:16 And I, the Lord God, said unto Adam, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat; if so, thou shouldest surely die?
3:17 And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest me, and commanded that she should remain with me, she gave me of the fruit of the tree; and I did eat.
3:18 And I, the Lord God, said unto the woman, What is this thing which thou hast done?
3:19 And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.
3:20 And I, the Lord God, said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou shalt be cursed above all cattle and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life;
3:21 And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed; and he shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.
3:22 Unto the woman, I, the Lord God, said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
3:23 And unto Adam, I, the Lord God, said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife and hast eaten of the fruit of the tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it, cursed shall be the ground for thy sake. In sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life.
3:24 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;
3:25 By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread until thou shalt return unto the ground, for thou shalt surely die; for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou wast, and unto dust shalt thou return.
3:26 And Adam called his wife's name Eve because she was the mother of all living; for thus have I, the Lord God, called the first of all women, which are many.
3:27 Unto Adam and also unto his wife did I, the Lord God, make coats of skins and clothed them.
3:28 And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil; and now, lest he put forth his hand, and partake also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever,
3:29 Therefore, I, the Lord God, will send him forth from the garden of Eden to till the ground from whence he was taken.
3:30 For as I, the Lord God, liveth, even so my words cannot return void, for as they go forth out of my mouth, they must be fulfilled.
3:31 So I drove out the man, and I placed at the east of the garden of Eden, cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life.
3:32 (And these are the words which I spake unto my servant Moses. And they are true, even as I will.
3:33 And I have spoken them unto you. See thou show them unto no man until I command you, except they that believe.) Amen.
Chapter 4
Adam and Eve till the earth--Sacrifices offered--Redemption declared--Satan estranges man from God
4:1 And it came to pass that after I, the Lord God, had driven them out, that Adam began to till the earth, and to have dominion over all the beasts of the field, and to eat his bread by the sweat of his brow, as I, the Lord, had commanded him; and Eve also, his wife, did labor with him.
4:2 And Adam knew his wife, and she bare unto him sons and daughters; and they began to multiply and to replenish the earth.
4:3 And from that time forth, the sons and daughters of Adam began to divide, two and two, in the land, and to till the land, and to tend flocks; and they also begat sons and daughters.
4:4 And Adam called upon the name of the Lord, and Eve also, his wife; and they heard the voice of the Lord, from the way towards the garden of Eden, speaking unto them; and they saw him not, for they were shut out from his presence.
4:5 And he gave unto them commandments that they should worship the Lord, their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks for an offering unto the Lord.
4:6 And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord. And after many days, an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying, Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him, I know not, save the Lord commanded me.
4:7 And then the angel spake, saying, This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth;
4:8 Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son. And thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore.
4:9 And in that day, the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying, I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever; that, as thou hast fallen, thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will.
4:10 And in that day, Adam blessed God, and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying, Blessed be the name of God; for because of my transgression, my eyes are opened; and in this life I shall have joy, and again, in the flesh I shall see God.
4:11 And Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad, saying, Were it not for our transgression, we never should have had seed and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.
4:12 And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God; and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters.
4:13 And Satan came among them, saying, I am also a son of God. And he commanded them, saying, Believe it not. And they believed it not; and they loved Satan more than God. And men began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish.
Chapter 5
Repentance commanded--Cain and Abel--Secret combinations--The earth cursed--Gospel preached from the beginning
5:1 And the Lord God called upon men, by the Holy Ghost, everywhere, and commanded them that they should repent.
5:2 And as many as believed in the Son and repented of their sins should be saved. And as many as believed not and repented not should be damned. And the words went forth out of the mouth of God in a firm decree; wherefore, they must be fulfilled.
5:3 And Adam ceased not to call upon God--and Eve also, his wife.
5:4 And Adam knew Eve, his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord; wherefore, he may not reject his words. But, behold, also, Cain hearkened not, saying, Who is the Lord, that I should know him?
5:5 And she again conceived and bare his brother Abel. And Abel hearkened unto the voice of the Lord. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
5:6 And Cain loved Satan more than God. And Satan commanded him, saying, Make an offering unto the Lord. And in process of time, it came to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord.
5:7 And Abel, he also brought, of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof; and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering; but unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect.
5:8 Now Satan knew this, and it pleased him. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.
5:9 And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? Why is thy countenance fallen? If thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted; and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door; and Satan desireth to have thee; and except thou shalt hearken unto my commandments, I will deliver thee up, and it shall be unto thee according to his desire; and thou shalt rule over him, for from this time forth thou shalt be the father of his lies.
5:10 Thou shalt be called Perdition, for thou wast also before the world; and it shall be said in time to come that these abominations were had from Cain, for he rejected the greater counsel which was had from God; and this is a cursing which I will put upon thee, except thou repent.
5:11 And Cain was wroth and listened not any more to the voice of the Lord, neither to Abel his brother, who walked in holiness before the Lord.
5:12 And Adam also and his wife mourned before the Lord because of Cain and his brethren.
5:13 And it came to pass that Cain took one of his brother's daughters to wife, and they loved Satan more than God.
5:14 And Satan said unto Cain, Swear unto me by thy throat; and if thou tell it, thou shalt die; and swear thy brethren by their heads and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if they tell it, they shall surely die; and this that thy father may not know it; and this day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thine hands.
5:15 And Satan sware unto Cain, that he would do according to his commands. And all these things were done in secret.
5:16 And Cain said, Truly I am Mahan, the master of this great secret, that I may murder and get gain. Wherefore, Cain was called Master Mahan; and he gloried in his wickedness.
5:17 And Cain went into the field, and Cain talked with Abel, his brother; and it came to pass that while they were in the field, Cain rose up against Abel, his brother, and slew him.
5:18 And Cain gloried in that which he had done, saying, I am free; surely the flocks of my brother falleth into my hands.
5:19 And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel, thy brother? And he said, I know not. Am I my brother's keeper?
5:20 And the Lord said, What hast thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood cries unto me from the ground.
5:21 And now, thou shalt be cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand.
5:22 When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.
5:23 And Cain said unto the Lord, Satan tempted me because of my brother's flocks; and I was wroth also, for his offering thou didst accept, and not mine.
5:24 My punishment is greater than I can bear. Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the Lord, and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass that he that findeth me will slay me because of mine iniquities, for these things are not hid from the Lord.
5:25 And I, the Lord, said unto him, Whosoever slayeth thee, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold; and I, the Lord, set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.
5:26 And Cain was shut out from the presence of the Lord and, with his wife and many of his brethren, dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
5:27 And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and bare Enoch; and he also begat many sons and daughters. And he builded a city, and he called the name of the city after the name of his son Enoch.
5:28 And unto Enoch was born Irad and other sons and daughters; and Irad begat Mehujael and other sons and daughters.
5:29 And Mehujael begat Methusael and other sons and daughters. And Methusael begat Lamech.
5:30 And Lamech took unto himself two wives: the name of one being Adah, and the name of the other, Zillah.
5:31 And Adah bare Jabal; he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and they were keepers of cattle; and his brother's name was Jubal, who was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.
5:32 And Zillah, she also bare Tubal Cain, an instructor of every artificer in brass and iron; and the sister of Tubal Cain was called Naamah.
5:33 And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech; hearken unto my speech, for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.
5:34 If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech shall be seventy and sevenfold.
5:35 For Lamech, having entered into a covenant with Satan after the manner of Cain, wherein he became Master Mahan, master of that great secret which was administered unto Cain by Satan,
5:36 And Irad, the son of Enoch, having known their secret, began to reveal it unto the sons of Adam; wherefore, Lamech, being angry, slew him--not like unto Cain his brother Abel for the sake of getting gain; but he slew him for the oath's sake;
5:37 For, from the days of Cain, there was a secret combination; and their works were in the dark, and they knew every man his brother.
5:38 Wherefore, the Lord cursed Lamech and his house and all they that had covenanted with Satan; for they kept not the commandments of God. And it displeased God, and he ministered not unto them.
5:39 And their works were abominations and began to spread among all the sons of men. And it was among the sons of men.
5:40 And among the daughters of men, these things were not spoken because that Lamech had spoken the secret unto his wives, and they rebelled against him, and declared these things abroad, and had not compassion.
5:41 Wherefore, Lamech was despised, and cast out, and came not among the sons of men, lest he should die.
5:42 And thus the works of darkness began to prevail among all the sons of men.
5:43 And God cursed the earth with a sore curse and was angry with the wicked, with all the sons of men whom he had made; for they would not hearken unto his voice nor believe on his Only Begotten Son, even him whom he declared should come in the meridian of time, who was prepared from before the foundation of the world.
5:44 And thus the gospel began to be preached from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost.
5:45 And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam by a holy ordinance, and the gospel preached, and a decree sent forth that it should be in the world until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen.
Chapter 6
Adam warns men to repent--Seth is born--Book of remembrance--Same priesthood in the beginning and the end--Genealogy kept--Satan has great dominion--Enoch's calling
6:1 And Adam hearkened unto the voice of God and called upon his sons to repent.
6:2 And Adam knew his wife again, and she bare a son; and he called his name Seth.
6:3 And Adam glorified the name of God, for he said, God hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel whom Cain slew.
6:4 And God revealed himself unto Seth; and he rebelled not, but offered an acceptable sacrifice like unto his brother Abel. And to him also was born a son, and he called his name Enos.
6:5 And then began these men to call upon the name of the Lord; and the Lord blessed them; and a book of remembrance was kept in the which was recorded in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the Spirit of inspiration;
6:6 And by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled.
6:7 Now this same priesthood which was in the beginning shall be in the end of the world also.
6:8 Now this prophecy Adam spake as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost.
6:9 And a genealogy was kept of the children of God. And this was the book of the generations of Adam, saying, In the day that God created man (in the likeness of God made he him), in the image of his own body, male and female created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created, and became living souls in the land, upon the footstool of God.
6:10 And Adam lived one hundred and thirty years and begat a son in his own likeness, after his own image, and called his name Seth.
6:11 And the days of Adam, after he had begotten Seth, were eight hundred years. And he begat many sons and daughters. And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years; and he died.
6:12 Seth lived one hundred and five years, and begat Enos, and prophesied in all his days, and taught his son Enos in the ways of God. Wherefore, Enos prophesied also. And Seth lived after he begat Enos, eight hundred and seven years, and begat many sons and daughters.
6:13 And the children of men were numerous upon all the face of the land. And in those days, Satan had great dominion among men and raged in their hearts; and from thenceforth came wars and bloodshed.
6:14 And a man's hand was against his own brother in administering death because of secret works, seeking for power. And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years; and he died.
6:15 And Enos lived ninety years and begat Cainan. And Enos and the residue of the people of God came out from the land which was called Shulon and dwelt in a land of promise, which he called after his own son, whom he had named Cainan.
6:16 And Enos lived after he begat Cainan, eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat many sons and daughters. And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years; and he died.
6:17 And Cainan lived seventy years and begat Mahalaleel.
6:18 And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel, eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years; and he died.
6:19 And Mahalaleel lived sixty-five years and begat Jared.
6:20 And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared, eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred and ninety-five years; and he died.
6:21 And Jared lived one hundred and sixty-two years and begat Enoch.
6:22 And Jared lived after he begat Enoch, eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. And Jared taught Enoch in all the ways of God.
6:23 And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God, with whom God himself conversed.
6:24 And they were preachers of righteousness, and spake, and prophesied, and called upon all men everywhere to repent. And faith was taught unto the children of men.
6:25 And it came to pass that all the days of Jared were nine hundred and sixty-two years; and he died.
6:26 And Enoch lived sixty-five years and begat Methuselah. And it came to pass that Enoch journeyed in the land among the people; and as he journeyed, the Spirit of God descended out of heaven and abode upon him;
6:27 And he heard a voice from heaven, saying, Enoch, my son, prophesy unto this people and say unto them, Repent, for thus saith the Lord, I am angry with this people, and my fierce anger is kindled against them; for their hearts have waxed hard, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes cannot see afar off.
6:28 And for these many generations, even since the day that I created them, have they gone astray, and have denied me, and have sought their own counsels in the dark; and in their own abominations have they devised murder and have not kept the commandments which I gave unto their father Adam.
6:29 Wherefore, they have forsworn themselves, and by their oaths they have brought upon themselves death.
6:30 And a hell I have prepared for them if they repent not.
6:31 And this is a decree which I have sent forth in the beginning of the world, from mine own mouth, from the foundation thereof; and by the mouths of my servants, thy fathers, have I decreed it, even as it shall be sent forth in the world unto the end thereof.
6:32 And when Enoch had heard these words, he bowed himself to the earth before the Lord and spake before the Lord, saying, Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me, for I am slow of speech? Wherefore am I thy servant?
6:33 And the Lord said unto Enoch, Go forth, and do as I have commanded thee; and no man shall pierce thee.
6:34 Open thy mouth, and it shall be filled, and I will give thee utterance; for all flesh is in my hands, and I will do as seemeth me good.
6:35 Say unto this people, Choose ye this day to serve the Lord God who made you.
6:36 Behold, my Spirit is upon you; wherefore, all thy words will I justify; and the mountains shall flee before you, and the rivers shall turn from their course; and thou shalt abide in me, and I in you; therefore walk with me.
6:37 And the Lord spake unto Enoch and said unto him, Anoint thine eyes with clay and wash them, and thou shalt see; and he did so.
6:38 And he beheld the spirits that God had created, and he beheld also things which were not visible to the natural eye; and from thenceforth came the saying abroad in the land: A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people.
6:39 And it came to pass that Enoch went forth in the land among the people, standing upon the hills, and the high places, and cried with a loud voice, testifying against their works.
6:40 And all men were offended because of him; and they came forth to hear him upon the high places, saying unto the tent-keepers, Tarry ye here and keep the tents while we go yonder to behold the seer, for he prophesieth; and there is a strange thing in the land--a wild man hath come among us.
6:41 And it came to pass when they heard him, no man laid hands on him; for fear came on all them that heard him, for he walked with God.
6:42 And there came a man unto him, whose name was Mahijah, and said unto him, Tell us plainly who thou art and from whence thou comest.
6:43 And he said unto them, I came out from the land of Cainan, the land of my fathers, a land of righteousness unto this day; and my father taught me in all the ways of God.
6:44 And it came to pass, as I journeyed from the land of Cainan by the sea east, I beheld a vision; and lo, the heavens I saw, and the Lord spake with me and gave me commandment; wherefore, for this cause, to keep the commandment, I speak forth these words.
6:45 And Enoch continued his speech, saying, The Lord which spake with me, the same is the God of heaven; and he is my God and your God, and ye are my brethren. And why counsel ye yourselves and deny the God of heaven?
6:46 The heavens he made; the earth is his footstool, and the foundation thereof is his; behold, he laid it, and hosts of men hath he brought in upon the face thereof.
6:47 And death hath come upon our fathers; nevertheless, we know them and cannot deny; and even the first of all we know, even Adam; for a book of remembrance we have written among us, according to the pattern given by the finger of God; and it is given in our own language.
6:48 And as Enoch spake forth the words of God, the people trembled and could not stand in his presence.
6:49 And he said unto them, Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death, and we are made partakers of misery and woe.
6:50 Behold, Satan hath come among the children of men and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God.
6:51 But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.
6:52 And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying, I am God; I made the world and men before they were in the flesh.
6:53 And he also said unto him, If thou wilt, turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name; and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.
6:54 And our father Adam spake unto the Lord and said, Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water?
6:55 And the Lord said unto Adam, Behold, I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the garden of Eden.
6:56 Hence came the saying abroad among the people that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world.
6:57 And the Lord spake unto Adam, saying, Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so, when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts; and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good.
6:58 And it is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore, they are agents unto themselves.
6:59 And I have given unto you another law and commandment; wherefore, teach it unto your children that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in no wise inherit the kingdom of God.
6:60 For no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence; for in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name; and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.
6:61 Therefore, I give unto you a commandment to teach these things freely unto your children, saying that by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death; and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so become of dust a living soul,
6:62 Even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten, that ye may be sanctified from all sin and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world and eternal life in the world to come--even immortal glory.
6:63 For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified; and by the blood ye are sanctified.
6:64 Therefore, it is given to abide in you the record of heaven, the Comforter, the peaceable things of immortal glory, the truth of all things, that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things, that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment.
6:65 And now, behold, I say unto you, This is the plan of salvation unto all men through the blood of mine Only Begotten, who shall come in the meridian of time.
6:66 And behold, all things have their likeness; and all things are created and made to bear record of me: both things which are temporal and things which are spiritual, things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath; all things bear record of me.
6:67 And it came to pass when the Lord had spoken with Adam, our father, that Adam cried unto the Lord; and he was caught away by the Spirit of the Lord, and was carried down into the water, and was laid under the water, and was brought forth out of the water; and thus he was baptized.
6:68 And the Spirit of God descended upon him; and thus he was born of the Spirit and became quickened in the inner man.
6:69 And he heard a voice out of heaven, saying, Thou art baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost; this is the record of the Father and the Son from henceforth and forever;
6:70 And thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity.
6:71 Behold, thou art one in me, a son of God; and thus may all become my sons. Amen.
Chapter 7
Prophecy of Enoch, his preaching--Zion established, taken to heaven--Heavens weep--Earth is promised rest--Covenant continued through Methuselah--Noah is born
7:1 And it came to pass that Enoch continued his speech, saying, Behold, our father Adam taught these things; and many have believed and become the sons of God; and many have believed not, and have perished in their sins, and are looking forth with fear, in torment, for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God to be poured out upon them.
7:2 And from that time forth, Enoch began to prophesy, saying unto the people that, As I was journeying, and stood in the place Mahujah, and cried unto the Lord, there came a voice out of heaven, saying, Turn ye and get ye upon the mount Simeon.
7:3 And it came to pass that I turned and went up on the mount; and as I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory.
7:4 And I saw the Lord, and he stood before my face; and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face; and he said unto me, Look, and I will show unto thee the world for the space of many generations.
7:5 And it came to pass that I beheld in the valley of Shum, and lo, a great people which dwelt in tents, which were the people of Shum.
7:6 And again the Lord said unto me, Look. And I looked towards the north, and I beheld the people of Cainan, which dwelt in tents.
7:7 And the Lord said unto me, Prophesy. And I prophesied, saying,
7:8 Behold, the people of Cainan, which are numerous, shall go forth in battle array against the people of Shum and shall slay them, that they shall be utterly destroyed.
7:9 And the people of Cainan shall divide themselves in the land; and the land shall be barren and unfruitful, and none other people shall dwell there but the people of Cainan; for behold, the Lord shall curse the land with much heat, and the barrenness thereof shall go forth forever.
7:10 And there was a blackness came upon all the children of Cainan, that they were despised among all people.
7:11 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me, Look. And I looked, and I beheld the land of Sharon, and the land of Enoch, and the land of Omner, and the land of Heni, and the land of Shem, and the land of Haner, and the land of Hanannihah, and all the inhabitants thereof.
7:12 And the Lord said unto me, Go forth to this people and say unto them, Repent, lest I come out and smite them with a curse and they die.
7:13 And he gave unto me a commandment that I should baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, who is full of grace and truth, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and the Son.
7:14 And it came to pass that Enoch continued to call upon all the people, save it were the people of Cainan, to repent.
7:15 And so great was the faith of Enoch that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command.
7:16 And the rivers of water were turned out of their course, and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness.
7:17 And all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him.
7:18 There also came up a land out of the depths of the sea; and so great was the fear of the enemies of the people of God that they fled, and stood afar off, and went upon the land which came up out of the depths of the sea.
7:19 And the giants of the land also stood afar off; and there went forth a curse upon all the people which fought against God.
7:20 And from that time forth, there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness.
7:21 And the fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord which was upon his people.
7:22 And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains and upon the high places and did flourish.
7:23 And the Lord called his people Zion because they were of one heart, and of one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there were no poor among them.
7:24 And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God.
7:25 And it came to pass in his days that he built a city that was called the city of holiness, even Zion.
7:26 And it came to pass that Enoch talked with the Lord, and he said unto the Lord, Surely Zion shall dwell in safety forever. But the Lord said unto Enoch, Zion have I blessed, but the residue of the people have I cursed.
7:27 And it came to pass that the Lord showed unto Enoch all the inhabitants of the earth; and he beheld, and lo! Zion in process of time was taken up into heaven.
7:28 And the Lord said unto Enoch, Behold mine abode forever.
7:29 And Enoch also beheld the residue of the people which were the sons of Adam, and they were a mixture of all the seed of Adam, save it were the seed of Cain; for the seed of Cain were black and had not place among them.
7:30 And after that Zion was taken up into heaven, Enoch beheld, and lo, all the nations of the earth were before him; and there came generation upon generation.
7:31 And Enoch was high and lifted up, even in the bosom of the Father and the Son of Man; and behold, the powers of Satan were upon all the face of the earth; and he saw angels descending out of heaven, and he heard a loud voice, saying, Woe! woe! be unto the inhabitants of the earth!
7:32 And he beheld Satan, and he had a great chain in his hand, and it veiled the whole face of the earth with darkness; and he looked up and laughed, and his angels rejoiced.
7:33 And Enoch beheld angels descending out of heaven, bearing testimony of the Father and of the Son.
7:34 And the Holy Ghost fell on many, and they were caught up by the powers of heaven into Zion.
7:35 And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people and wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying, How is it that the heavens weep and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains? And Enoch said unto the Lord, How is it that thou canst weep, seeing thou art holy and from all eternity to all eternity?
7:36 And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, and millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations;
7:37 And thy curtains are stretched out still, and thou art there, and thy bosom is there; and also, thou art just; thou art merciful and kind forever;
7:38 Thou hast taken Zion to thine own bosom from all thy creations, from all eternity to all eternity; and naught but peace, justice, and truth is the habitation of thy throne; and mercy shall go before thy face and have no end. How is it that thou canst weep?
7:39 The Lord said unto Enoch, Behold, these thy brethren, they are the workmanship of mine own hands, and I gave unto them their knowledge* in the day that I created them. *["Intelligence" is used in some editions of the Inspired Version.]
7:40 And in the garden of Eden gave I unto man his agency; and unto thy brethren have I said, and also gave commandment, that they should love one another and that they should choose me their Father.
7:41 But behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood; and the fire of mine indignation is kindled against them; and in my hot displeasure will I send in the floods upon them; for my fierce anger is kindled against them.
7:42 Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name also. Wherefore, I can stretch forth my hands and hold all the creations which I have made, and mine eye can pierce them also.
7:43 And among all the workmanship of my hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren; but behold, their sins shall be upon the heads of their fathers; Satan shall be their father, and misery shall be their doom; and the whole heavens shall weep over them, even all the workmanship of my hands.
7:44 Wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer? But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them, and he whom I have chosen hath pleaded before my face;
7:45 Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins, inasmuch as they will repent, in the day that my chosen shall return unto me; and until that day they shall be in torment.
7:46 Wherefore, for this shall the heavens weep, yea, and all the workmanship of my hands.
7:47 And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Enoch and told Enoch all the doings of the children of men.
7:48 Wherefore, Enoch knew and looked upon their wickedness and their misery, and wept, and stretched forth his arms; and his heart swelled wide as eternity, and his bowels yearned; and all eternity shook.
7:49 And Enoch saw Noah also and his family, that the posterity of all the sons of Noah should be saved with a temporal salvation.
7:50 Wherefore, Enoch saw that Noah built an ark; and the Lord smiled upon it and held it in his own hand; but upon the residue of the wicked came the floods and swallowed them up.
7:51 And as Enoch saw thus, he had bitterness of soul, and wept over his brethren, and said unto the heavens, I will refuse to be comforted.
7:52 But the Lord said unto Enoch, Lift up your heart, and be glad, and look. And it came to pass that Enoch looked, and from Noah he beheld all the families of the earth; and he cried unto the Lord, saying, When shall the day of the Lord come? When shall the blood of the righteous be shed, that all they that mourn may be sanctified and have eternal life?
7:53 And the Lord said, It shall be in the meridian of time, in the days of wickedness and vengeance.
7:54 And behold, Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, even in the flesh; and his soul rejoiced, saying, The righteous is lifted up; and the Lamb is slain from the foundation of the world; and through faith I am in the bosom of the Father; and behold, Zion is with me!
7:55 And it came to pass that Enoch looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying, Woe! woe! is me, the mother of men! I am pained; I am weary because of the wickedness of my children! When shall I rest and be cleansed from the filthiness which has gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?
7:56 And when Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying, O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth? Wilt thou not bless the children of Noah?
7:57 And it came to pass that Enoch continued his cry unto the Lord, saying, I ask thee, O Lord, in the name of thine Only Begotten, even Jesus Christ, that thou wilt have mercy upon Noah and his seed, that the earth might never more be covered by the floods.
7:58 And the Lord could not withhold; and he covenanted with Enoch and sware unto him with an oath that he would stay the floods, that he would call upon the children of Noah; and he sent forth an unalterable decree that a remnant of his seed should always be found among all nations while the earth should stand.
7:59 And the Lord said, Blessed is he through whose seed Messiah shall come; for he saith, I am Messiah, the King of Zion, the Rock of Heaven, which is broad as eternity; and whoso cometh in at the gate and climbeth up by me shall never fall.
7:60 Wherefore, blessed are they of whom I have spoken, for they shall come forth with songs of everlasting joy.
7:61 And it came to pass that Enoch cried unto the Lord, saying, When the Son of Man cometh in the flesh, shall the earth rest? I pray thee, show me these things.
7:62 And the Lord said unto Enoch, Look. And he looked and beheld the Son of Man lifted up on the cross after the manner of men.
7:63 And he heard a loud voice, and the heavens were veiled; and all the creations of God mourned, and the earth groaned; and the rocks were rent; and the saints arose and were crowned at the right hand of the Son of Man with crowns of glory.
7:64 And as many of the spirits as were in prison came forth and stood on the right hand of God. And the remainder were reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day.
7:65 And again Enoch wept and cried unto the Lord, saying, When shall the earth rest?
7:66 And Enoch beheld the Son of Man ascend up unto the Father. And he called unto the Lord, saying, Wilt thou not come again upon the earth? For inasmuch as thou art God, and I know thee, and thou hast sworn unto me and commanded me that I should ask in the name of thine Only Begotten, thou hast made me and given unto me a right to thy throne, and not of myself, but through thine own grace. Wherefore, I ask thee if thou wilt not come again on the earth?
7:67 And the Lord said unto Enoch, As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfill the oath which I made unto you concerning the children of Noah.
7:68 And the day shall come that the earth shall rest. But before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth.
7:69 And great tribulations shall be among the children of men; but my people will I preserve; and righteousness will I send down out of heaven, and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten, his resurrection from the dead, yea, and also the resurrection of all men.
7:70 And righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine own elect from the four quarters of the earth unto a place which I shall prepare, a holy city, that my people may gird up their loins and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem.
7:71 And the Lord said unto Enoch, Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there; and we will receive them into our bosom; and they shall see us, and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other;
7:72 And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years shall the earth rest.
7:73 And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the space of a thousand years.
7:74 But before that day, he saw great tribulation among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgment of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked.
7:75 And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world. And he saw the day of the righteous, the hour of their redemption, and received a fullness of joy.
7:76 And all the days of Zion in the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years.
7:77 And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion.
7:78 And it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, Zion is fled. And all the days of Enoch were four hundred and thirty years.
7:79 And it came to pass that Methuselah, the son of Enoch, was not taken, that the covenants of the Lord might be fulfilled which he made to Enoch; for he truly covenanted with Enoch that Noah should be of the fruit of his loins.
7:80 And it came to pass that Methuselah prophesied that from his loins should spring all the kingdoms of the earth (through Noah), and he took glory unto himself.
7:81 And there came forth a great famine into the land, and the Lord cursed the earth with a sore curse, and many of the inhabitants thereof died.
7:82 And it came to pass that Methuselah lived one hundred and eighty-seven years and begat Lamech; and Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech, seven hundred and eighty-two years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred and sixty-nine years; and he died.
7:83 And Lamech lived one hundred and eighty-two years and begat a son, and he called his name Noah, saying, This son shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed.
7:84 And Lamech lived after he begat Noah, five hundred and ninety-five years, and begat sons and daughters. And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred and seventy-seven years; and he died.
7:85 And Noah was four hundred and fifty years old and begat Japheth; and forty-two years afterwards, he begat Shem of her who was the mother of Japheth; and when he was five hundred years old, he begat Ham.
Chapter 8
God calls Noah--He declares the gospel--Flood foretold--Ark built--Noah's family and animals saved from the flood
8:1 And Noah and his sons hearkened unto the Lord and gave heed; and they were called the sons of God.
8:2 And when these men began to multiply on the face of the earth and daughters were born unto them, the sons of men saw that their daughters were fair; and they took them wives even as they chose.
8:3 And the Lord said unto Noah, The daughters of thy sons have sold themselves; for behold, mine anger is kindled against the sons of men, for they will not hearken to my voice.
8:4 And it came to pass that Noah prophesied and taught the things of God, even as it was in the beginning.
8:5 And the Lord said unto Noah, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for he shall know that all flesh shall die, yet his days shall be a hundred and twenty years; and if men do not repent, I will send in the floods upon them.
8:6 And in those days there were giants on the earth, and they sought Noah to take away his life;
8:7 But the Lord was with Noah, and the power of the Lord was upon him; and the Lord ordained Noah after his own order and commanded him that he should go forth and declare his gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch.
8:8 And it came to pass that Noah called upon the children of men, that they should repent; but they hearkened not unto his words.
8:9 And also, after that they had heard him, they came up before him, saying, Behold, we are the sons of God. Have we not taken unto ourselves the daughters of men? And are we not eating, and drinking, and marrying, and given in marriage? And our wives bear unto us children; and the same are mighty men, which are like unto them of old, men of great renown. And they hearkened not unto the words of Noah.
8:10 And God saw that the wickedness of man had become great in the earth; and every man was lifted up in the imagination of the thoughts of his heart, being only evil continually.
8:11 And it came to pass that Noah continued his preaching unto the people, saying, Hearken and give heed unto my words. Believe, and repent of your sins, and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even as our fathers did, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, that ye may have all things made manifest;
8:12 And if you do not this, the floods will come in upon you; nevertheless, they hearkened not.
8:13 And it repented Noah, and his heart was pained that the Lord had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.
8:14 And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth, both man, and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air,
8:15 For it repenteth Noah that I have created them and that I have made them; and he hath called upon me, for they have sought his life.
8:16 And thus Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God, and also his three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
8:17 The earth was corrupt before God; and it was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.
8:18 And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence; and behold, I will destroy all flesh from off the earth.
8:19 Make thee, therefore, an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and thou shalt pitch it within and without with pitch;
8:20 And the length of the ark thou shalt make three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
8:21 And windows shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; lower, second, and third chambers shalt thou make in it.
8:22 And behold, I, even I will bring in a flood of water upon the earth to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; everything that liveth on the earth shall die.
8:23 But with thee will I establish my covenant, even as I have sworn unto thy father, Enoch, that of thy posterity shall come all nations.
8:24 And thou shalt come into the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee.
8:25 And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every kind shalt thou bring into the ark to keep alive with thee; they shall be male and female.
8:26 Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind--two of every kind shalt thou take into the ark to keep alive.
8:27 And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten; and thou shalt gather fruit of every kind unto thee in the ark, and it shall be for food for thee and for them.
8:28 Thus did Noah according to all that God commanded him.
8:29 And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee only have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
8:30 Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female, and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female;
8:31 Of fowls also of the air, by sevens, the male and his female, to keep seed alive upon the face of the earth.
8:32 For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
8:33 And Noah did according to all that the Lord commanded him. And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
8:34 And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark because of the waters of the flood.
8:35 Of clean beasts, and of beasts that were not clean, and of fowls, and of everything that creepeth upon the earth there went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.
8:36 And it came to pass after seven days that the waters of the flood were upon the earth. In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, and the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
8:37 In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark--they, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth on the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, and every bird of every sort;
8:38 And they went unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath of life; and they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him; and the Lord shut him in.
8:39 And the flood was forty days upon the earth, and the waters increased and bare up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth.
8:40 And the waters prevailed and increased greatly upon the earth, and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
8:41 And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the face of the earth; and all the high hills under the whole heavens were covered. Fifteen cubits and upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.
8:42 And all flesh died that moved upon the face of the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beasts, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man.
8:43 All in whose nostrils the Lord had breathed the breath of life, of all that were on the dry land, died.
8:44 And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground: both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air; and they were destroyed from the earth;
8:45 And Noah only remained, and they that were with him in the ark.
8:46 And the waters prevailed on the earth one hundred and fifty days.
8:47 And God remembered Noah and all that were with him in the ark. And God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters assuaged.
8:48 The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained; and the waters returned from off the earth.
8:49 And after the end of the hundred and fifty days, the waters were abated. And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountain of Ararat.
8:50 And the waters decreased until the tenth month; and in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.
8:51 And it came to pass, at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made, and he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro until the waters were dried up from off the earth.
8:52 He also sent forth a dove from him to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground; but the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters had not receded from off the face of the whole earth; then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
8:53 And he stayed yet other seven days, and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark; and the dove came in to him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth an olive leaf plucked off; so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
8:54 And he stayed yet other seven days and sent forth a dove, which returned not again unto him any more.
8:55 And it came to pass, in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth.
8:56 And Noah removed the covering of the ark and looked; and behold, the face of the ground was dry. And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried.
Chapter 9
Noah builds an altar--Commandments concerning the shedding of blood--The everlasting covenant--Bow set in the cloud
9:1 And God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth out of the ark, thou and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.
9:2 Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, that they may breed abundantly in the earth and be fruitful and multiply upon the earth.
9:3 And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him. And every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
9:4 And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar, and gave thanks unto the Lord, and rejoiced in his heart.
9:5 And the Lord spake unto Noah, and he blessed him. And Noah smelled a sweet savor, and he said in his heart,
9:6 I will call on the name of the Lord, that he will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake--for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth--and that he will not again smite any more everything living, as he hath done, while the earth remaineth;
9:7 And that seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night may not cease with man.
9:8 And God blessed Noah and his sons and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.
9:9 Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.
9:10 But the blood of all flesh, which I have given you for meat, shall be shed upon the ground, which taketh life thereof; and the blood ye shall not eat.
9:11 And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hands.
9:12 And whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for man shall not shed the blood of man.
9:13 For a commandment I give: that every man's brother shall preserve the life of man; for in mine own image have I made man.
9:14 And a commandment I give unto you: Be ye fruitful and multiply; bring forth abundantly on the earth and multiply therein.
9:15 And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto your father Enoch, concerning your seed after you.
9:16 And it shall come to pass that every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, and of the cattle, and of the beast of the earth that is with you, which shall go out of the ark, shall not altogether perish; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
9:17 And I will establish my covenant with you, which I made unto Enoch, concerning the remnants of your posterity.
9:18 And God made a covenant with Noah and said, This shall be the token of the covenant I make between me and you, and for every living creature with you, for perpetual generations:
9:19 I will set my bow in the cloud; and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.
9:20 And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud; and I will remember my covenant, which I have made between me and you, for every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
9:21 And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch, that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch, which I have caught up unto myself.
9:22 And this is mine everlasting covenant: that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy;
9:23 And the general assembly of the church of the firstborn shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch.
9:24 And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will establish my covenant unto thee, which I have made between me and thee, for every living creature of all flesh that shall be upon the earth.
9:25 And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant which I have established between me and thee, for all flesh that shall be upon the earth.
9:26 And the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth; and Ham was the father of Canaan. These were the three sons of Noah, and of them was the whole earth overspread.
9:27 And Noah began to till the earth, and he was a husbandman; and he planted a vineyard, and he drank of the wine and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent;
9:28 And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his brethren without; and Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father, and they saw not their father's nakedness.
9:29 And Noah awoke from his wine and knew what his youngest son had done unto him; and he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
9:30 And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant, and a veil of darkness shall cover him, that he shall be known among all men.
9:31 God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.
9:32 And Noah lived after the flood, three hundred and fifty years. And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years; and he died.
Chapter 10
Genealogy of Noah's sons--Earth is divided
10:1 Now these were the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and unto them were sons born after the flood.
10:2 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meschech, and Tiras.
10:3 And these are the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah. And the sons of Javan: Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after the same tongue, after their families, in their nations.
10:4 And the sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan. And the sons of Cush: Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
10:5 And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter in the land. Wherefore, it is said, Even as Nimrod, the mighty hunter in the land.
10:6 And he began a kingdom, and the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh in the land of Shinar.
10:7 Out of that land went forth Asshur and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen between Nineveh and Calah; the same was a great city.
10:8 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, and Pathrusim, and Casluhim, out of whom came Philistim and Caphtorim.
10:9 And Canaan begat Sidon, his firstborn, and Heth, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and Girgashite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and the Arvadite, and Zemarite, and the Hamathite; and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.
10:10 And the borders of the Canaanites were from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar unto Gaza; as thou goest unto Sodom and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboiim even unto Lasha.
10:11 These were the sons of Ham, after their families, after the same tongue, in their countries, and in their nations.
10:12 Unto Shem also, which was the elder, children were born; and he was the father of Eber, and even to him were children born.
10:13 And these are the children of Shem: Eber, and Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
10:14 And these were the children of Aram: Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
10:15 And Arphaxad begat Salah, and Salah begat Eber. And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one, Peleg--the other, Joktan.
10:16 And Peleg was a mighty man, for in his days was the earth divided.
10:17 And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah, and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba, and Ophar, and Havilah, and Jobab; and these were the sons of Joktan.
10:18 And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar, a mount of the east.
10:19 These were the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.
10:20 These were the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations; and by these were the nations divided on the earth after the flood.
Chapter 11
Babel built--Language confounded--Generations of Shem--Abram is born, marries, and goes into Canaan
11:1 And the whole earth was of the same language and of the same speech. And it came to pass that many journeyed from the east; and as they journeyed from the east, they found a plain in the land of Shinar and dwelt there in the plain of Shinar.
11:2 And they said one to another, Come, go to; let us make brick and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and they had slime for mortar.
11:3 And they said, Come, go to; let us build us a city and a tower whose top will be high, nigh unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
11:4 And the Lord came down, beholding the city and the tower which the children of men were building;
11:5 And the Lord said, Behold, the people are the same, and they all have the same language; and this tower they begin to build; and now, nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined, except I, the Lord, confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So I, the Lord, will scatter them abroad from thence, upon all the face of the land and unto every quarter of the earth.
11:6 And they were confounded and left off to build the city; and they hearkened not unto the Lord; therefore, is the name of it called Babel because the Lord was displeased with their works and did there confound the language of all the earth; and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face thereof.
11:7 And these were the generations of Shem. And Shem, being a hundred years old, begat Arphaxad two years after the flood; and Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:8 And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years and begat Salah; and Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah, four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:9 And Salah lived thirty years and begat Eber; and Salah lived after he begat Eber, four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:10 And Eber lived four and thirty years and begat Peleg; and Eber lived after he begat Peleg, four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:11 And Peleg lived thirty years and begat Reu; and Peleg lived after he begat Reu, two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:12 And Reu lived two and thirty years and begat Serug; and Reu lived after he begat Serug, two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:13 And Serug lived thirty years and begat Nahor; and Serug lived after he begat Nahor, two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:14 And Nahor lived nine and twenty years and begat Terah; and Nahor lived after he begat Terah, a hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.
11:15 And Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
11:16 Now these were the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.
11:17 And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
11:18 And Abram and Nahor took them wives; and the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and the father of Iscah; but Sarai was barren, and she bare no child.
11:19 And Terah took Abram, his son, and Lot, the son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai, his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife, and went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran and dwelt there.
11:20 And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years; and Terah died in Haran.
Chapter 12
God's commandment and covenant with Abram--Abram and Sarai go to Egypt
12:1 Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house unto a land that I will show thee;
12:2 And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless thee and curse them that curse thee; and in thee shall the families of the earth be blessed.
12:3 So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him. And Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.
12:4 And Abram took Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.
12:5 And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem and the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanites were then in the land.
12:6 And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land. And there builded he an altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him.
12:7 And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, leaving Bethel on the west; and Hai was on the east. And there he builded an altar unto the Lord and called upon the name of the Lord. And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.
12:8 And there was a famine in the land; and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there, for the famine became grievous in the land.
12:9 And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai, his wife, Behold, now I know thee to be a fair woman to look upon; therefore, it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife. And they will kill me, but they will save thee alive. Say, I pray thee, unto them, I am his sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and my soul shall live because of thee.
12:10 And it came to pass that when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman, that she was very fair.
12:11 The princes also of Pharaoh saw her and commanded her to be brought before Pharaoh; and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
12:12 And he entreated Abram well for her sake; and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.
12:13 And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
12:14 And Pharaoh called Abram and said, What hast thou done unto me in this thing? Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? Why saidst thou, She is my sister? So I might have taken her unto me to wife. Now therefore, behold, I say unto thee, Take thy wife and go thy way.
12:15 And Pharaoh commanded men concerning him; and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had.
Chapter 13
Abram settles in Canaan--Abram and Lot separate--Abram promised many descendants, much land
13:1 And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, unto the south. And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
13:2 And he went on his journey from the south, even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai, unto the place of the altar which he had made there at the first; and there Abram called on the name of the Lord.
13:3 And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
13:4 And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together; for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together. And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle, that they could not dwell together.
13:5 And the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.
13:6 And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we are brethren.
13:7 Is not the whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me; if thou go to the left hand, then I will go to the right; if thou go to the right hand, then I will go to the left.
13:8 And Lot lifted up his eyes and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, like as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt.
13:9 Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan, and Lot journeyed east; and they separated themselves the one from the other.
13:10 Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
13:11 But the men of Sodom, becoming sinners and exceedingly wicked before the Lord, the Lord was angry with them.
13:12 And the Lord said unto Abram after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward;
13:13 And remember the covenant which I make with thee; for it shall be an everlasting covenant; and thou shalt remember the days of Enoch, thy father;
13:14 For all the land which thou seest will I give thee and to thy seed forever; and I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, thy seed shall also be numbered.
13:15 Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it, for I will give it unto thee. Then Abram removed his tent and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which was in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord.
Chapter 14
War between kings--Abram rescues Lot--Melchizedek, the high priest, blesses Abram, serves him bread and wine, and receives Abram's tithes
14:1 And it came to pass, in the days of Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Ellasar, and Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of nations,
14:2 That these kings made war with Bera, king of Sodom, and with Birsha, king of Gomorrah, Shinab, king of Admah, and Shemeber, king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
14:3 All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.
14:4 Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
14:5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim, and the Horites in their Mount Seir, unto Elparan, which was by the wilderness.
14:6 And they returned and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites and also the Amorites in Hazezontamar.
14:7 And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar;
14:8 And they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim--with Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and with Tidal, king of nations, and Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Ellasar--four kings with five.
14:9 And the vale of Siddim was filled with slime pits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain which was called Hanabal.
14:10 And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their victuals and went their way.
14:11 And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods and departed.
14:12 And there came one that had escaped and told Abram, the Hebrew, the man of God, for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eschol and brother of Aner; and these were confederate with Abram.
14:13 And when Abram heard that Lot, his brother's son, was taken captive, he armed his trained men and they which were born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued unto Dan.
14:14 And he divided himself against them, he and his men, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which was on the left hand of Damascus.
14:15 And he brought back Lot, his brother's son, and all his goods, and the women also, and the people.
14:16 And the king of Sodom also went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which was the king's dale.
14:17 And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine; and he brake bread and blessed it; and he blessed the wine, he being the priest of the most high God.
14:18 And he gave to Abram, and he blessed him, and said, Blessed Abram, thou art a man of the most high God, possessor of heaven and of earth;
14:19 And blessed is the name of the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thine hand.
14:20 And Abram gave him tithes of all he had taken.
14:21 And the king of Sodom said to Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.
14:22 And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lifted up my hand unto the Lord, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
14:23 And have sworn that I will not take of thee from a thread even to a shoe latchet and that I will not take anything that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich,
14:24 Save only that which the young men have eaten and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eschol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.
14:25 And Melchizedek lifted up his voice and blessed Abram.
14:26 Now Melchizedek was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness; and when a child, he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire.
14:27 And thus, having been approved of God, he was ordained a high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch,
14:28 It being after the order of the Son of God, which order came not by man, nor the will of man, neither by father nor mother, neither by beginning of days nor end of years, but of God.
14:29 And it was delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believed on his name--
14:30 For God, having sworn unto Enoch and unto his seed with an oath by himself that everyone being ordained after this order and calling should have power, by faith, to break mountains, to divide the seas, to dry up waters, to turn them out of their course,
14:31 To put at defiance the armies of nations, to divide the earth, to break every band, to stand in the presence of God, to do all things according to his will, according to his command, subdue principalities and powers; and this by the will of the Son of God which was from before the foundation of the world.
14:32 And men having this faith, coming up unto this order of God, were translated and taken up into heaven.
14:33 And now, Melchizedek was a priest of this order; therefore, he obtained peace in Salem and was called the prince of peace.
14:34 And his people wrought righteousness, and obtained heaven, and sought for the city of Enoch which God had before taken, separating it from the earth, having reserved it unto the latter days, or the end of the world,
14:35 And hath said, and sworn with an oath, that the heavens and the earth should come together and the sons of God should be tried so as by fire.
14:36 And this Melchizedek, having thus established righteousness, was called the king of heaven by his people, or, in other words, the king of peace.
14:37 And he lifted up his voice, and he blessed Abram, being the high priest and the keeper of the storehouse of God,
14:38 Him whom God had appointed to receive tithes for the poor.
14:39 Wherefore, Abram paid unto him tithes of all that he had, of all the riches which he possessed, which God had given him more than that which he had need.
14:40 And it came to pass that God blessed Abram and gave unto him riches, and honor, and lands for an everlasting possession, according to the covenant which he had made and according to the blessing wherewith Melchizedek had blessed him.
Chapter 15
God covenants with Abram--Abram's vision--Captivity in Egypt foretold
15:1 And it came to pass that after these things, the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, saying,
15:2 Fear not, Abram; I will be thy shield; I will be thy exceeding great reward. And according to the blessings of my servant, I will give unto thee.
15:3 And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless and Eliezer of Damascus was made the steward of my house?
15:4 And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed; and lo, one born in my house is mine heir.
15:5 And behold, the word of the Lord came unto him again, saying,
15:6 This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
15:7 And he brought him forth abroad, and he said, Look now toward heaven and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them.
15:8 And he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.
15:9 And Abram said, Lord God, how wilt thou give me this land for an everlasting inheritance?
15:10 And the Lord said, Though thou wast dead, yet am I not able to give it thee?
15:11 And if thou shalt die, yet thou shalt possess it, for the day cometh that the Son of Man shall live. But how can he live if he be not dead? He must first be quickened.
15:12 And it came to pass that Abram looked forth, and saw the days of the Son of Man, and was glad; and his soul found rest, and he believed in the Lord; and the Lord counted it unto him for righteousness.
15:13 And the Lord said unto him, I, the Lord, brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees to give thee this land to inherit it.
15:14 And Abram said, Lord, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? Yet he believed God. And the Lord said unto him, Take me a heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.
15:15 And he took unto him all these, and he divided them in the midst, and he laid each piece one against the other; but the birds divided he not.
15:16 And when the fowls came down upon the carcasses, Abram drove them away. And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and lo, a great horror of darkness fell upon him.
15:17 And the Lord spake, and he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land which shall not be theirs and shall serve strangers; and they shall be afflicted and serve them four hundred years; and also that nation whom they shall serve will I judge; and afterwards shall they come out with great substance.
15:18 And thou shalt die and go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.
15:19 But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again; for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.
15:20 And it came to pass that when the sun went down and it was dark, behold, a smoking furnace and a burning lamp, which passed between those pieces which Abram had divided.
15:21 And in that same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river Euphrates--
15:22 The Kenites, and the Kenazites, and the Kadmonites, and Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.
Chapter 16
Sarai gives Hagar to Abram--Hagar flees and is sent back by an angel--Ishmael is born
16:1 Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bare him no children. And she had a handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
16:2 And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from bearing; I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened unto the voice of Sarai.
16:3 And Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar her maid, the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband, Abram, to be his wife.
16:4 And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived; and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
16:5 And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong is upon thee; I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes; the Lord judge between me and thee.
16:6 But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hands; do to her as it pleaseth thee.
16:7 And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.
16:8 And an angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
16:9 And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence comest thou, and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
16:10 And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to thy mistress and submit thyself under her hands.
16:11 And the angel of the Lord said unto her, The Lord will multiply thy seed exceedingly so that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
16:12 And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son, and shall call his name Ishmael because the Lord hath heard thy afflictions.
16:13 And he will be a wild man; and his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
16:14 And she called the name of the angel of the Lord.
16:15 And he spake unto her, saying, Knowest thou that God seest thee?
16:16 And she said, I know that God seest me, for I have also here looked after him.
16:17 And there was a well between Kadesh and Bered near where Hagar saw the angel.
16:18 And the name of the angel was Beer-la-hai-roi; wherefore, the well was called Beer-la-hai-roi for a memorial.
16:19 And Hagar bare Abram a son; and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.
16:20 And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.
Chapter 17
Baptism corrupted--Age of accountability--Circumcision instituted--Abram and Sarai renamed--Sarah promised a son
17:1 And when Abram was ninety and nine years old, the Lord appeared to Abram and said unto him, I, the Almighty God, give unto thee a commandment that thou shalt walk uprightly before me and be perfect.
17:2 And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly.
17:3 And it came to pass that Abram fell on his face and called upon the name of the Lord.
17:4 And God talked with him, saying, My people have gone astray from my precepts and have not kept mine ordinances, which I gave unto their fathers;
17:5 And they have not observed mine anointing, and the burial, or baptism wherewith I commanded them,
17:6 But have turned from the commandment, and taken unto themselves the washing of children, and the blood of sprinkling,
17:7 And have said that the blood of the righteous Abel was shed for sins, and have not known wherein they are accountable before me.
17:8 But as for thee, behold, I will make my covenant with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
17:9 And this covenant I make that thy children may be known among all nations. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be called Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.
17:10 And I will make thee exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come of thee and of thy seed.
17:11 And I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee, and it shall be my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations, that thou mayest know forever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old.
17:12 And thou shalt observe to keep all my covenants wherein I covenanted with thy fathers; and thou shalt keep the commandments which I have given thee with mine own mouth, and I will be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee.
17:13 And I will give unto thee and thy seed after thee a land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.
17:14 And God said unto Abraham, Therefore, thou shalt keep my covenant, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations.
17:15 And this shall be my covenant which ye shall keep between me and thee and thy seed after thee: Every man-child among you shall be circumcised.
17:16 And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.
17:17 And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in your generations--
17:18 He that is born in the house or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.
17:19 He that is born in thy house and he that is bought with thy money must needs be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
17:20 And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.
17:21 And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai, thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah thou shalt call her name.
17:22 And I will bless her, and I will give thee a son of her; yea, I will bless her, and she shall be blessed, the mother of nations; kings and people shall be of her.
17:23 Then Abraham fell on his face, and rejoiced, and said in his heart, There shall a child be born unto him that is a hundred years old, and Sarah that is ninety years old shall bear.
17:24 And Abraham said unto God, Oh, that Ishmael might live uprightly before thee!
17:25 And God said, Sarah, thy wife, shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Isaac; and I will establish my covenant with him also, for an everlasting covenant with his seed after him.
17:26 And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee; behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
17:27 Twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.
17:28 But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.
17:29 And he left off talking with him; and God went up from Abraham.
17:30 And Abraham took Ishmael, his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.
17:31 And Abraham was ninety and nine years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
17:32 And Ishmael was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
17:33 In the selfsame day Abraham was circumcised, and Ishmael his son; and all the men of his house, which were born in his house, and bought with money of strangers, were also circumcised with him.
Chapter 18
The Lord appears to Abraham--Angels visit--Abraham blessed--Isaac's birth prophesied--Abraham to witness destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah--He attempts to save Sodom
18:1 And the Lord appeared unto Abraham in the plains of Mamre. And he sat in his tent door in the heat of the day;
18:2 And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and lo, three men stood by him; and when he saw, he ran to meet them from his tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground, and said,
18:3 My brethren, if now I have found favor in your sight, pass not away, I pray you, from thy servant.
18:4 Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree; and I will fetch a morsel of bread and comfort ye your hearts; after that you shall pass on; for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do as thou hast said.
18:5 And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead, and make cakes upon the hearth.
18:6 And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetched a calf, tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.
18:7 And he took butter, and milk, and the calf, which he had dressed, and set them before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.
18:8 And they said unto him, Where is Sarah, thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
18:9 And one of them blessed Abraham, and he said, I will certainly return unto thee from my journey; and lo, according to the time of life, Sarah, thy wife, shall have a son.
18:10 And Sarah heard him in the tent door.
18:11 And now Abraham and Sarah being old and stricken in age, therefore, it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women;
18:12 Therefore, Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I have waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?
18:13 And the angel of the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old? Is anything too hard for the Lord?
18:14 At the time appointed, behold, I will return unto thee from my journey, which the Lord hath sent me; and according to the time of life thou mayest know that Sarah shall have a son.
18:15 Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay, but thou didst laugh.
18:16 And the angels rose up from thence and looked toward Sodom; and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
18:17 And the angel of the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which the Lord will do for him--seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
18:18 For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.
18:19 And the angel of the Lord said unto Abraham, The Lord said unto us, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great and because their sin is very grievous, I will destroy them.
18:20 And I will send you, and ye shall go down now and see that their iniquities are rewarded unto them.
18:21 And ye shall have all things done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me.
18:22 And if ye do it not, it shall be upon your heads; for I will destroy them, and you shall know that I will do it, for it shall be before your eyes.
18:23 And the angels, which were holy men and were sent forth after the order of God, turned their faces from thence and went toward Sodom.
18:24 But Abraham stood yet before the Lord, remembering the things which had been told him.
18:25 And Abraham drew near to Sodom and said unto the Lord, calling upon his name, saying, Wilt thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? Wilt thou not spare them?
18:26 Peradventure there may be fifty righteous within the city, wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that may be therein?
18:27 Oh, may that be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked.
18:28 O God, may that be far from thee. For shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
18:29 And the Lord said unto Abraham, If thou findest in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.
18:30 And Abraham answered and said, Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which is able to destroy the city and lay all the people in dust and ashes.
18:31 Will the Lord spare them peradventure there lack five of the fifty righteous? Wilt thou destroy all the city for their wickedness if I find there forty and five righteous?
18:32 And he said, I will not destroy, but spare them.
18:33 And he spake unto him again and said, Peradventure there should be forty found there?
18:34 And he said, I will not destroy it for forty's sake.
18:35 And he said again unto the Lord, Oh, let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there?
18:36 And he said, I will not destroy them if thou shalt find thirty there.
18:37 And he said, Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord. Wilt thou destroy them if peradventure there shall twenty be found there?
18:38 And he said, I will not destroy them for twenty's sake.
18:39 And Abraham said unto the Lord, Oh, let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once. Peradventure ten shall be found there?
18:40 And the Lord said, I will not destroy them for ten's sake. And the Lord ceased speaking with Abraham.
18:41 And as soon as he had left communing with the Lord, Abraham went his way.
18:42 And it came to pass that Abraham returned unto his tent.
Chapter 19
Angels remove Lot from Sodom--Sodom and Gomorrah destroyed--Lot's wife perishes--Iniquity of Lot's daughters
19:1 And it came to pass that there came three angels to Sodom in the evening; and Lot sat in the door of his house in the city of Sodom.
19:2 And Lot, seeing the angels, rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground.
19:3 And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet; and ye shall rise up early and go on your ways.
19:4 And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.
19:5 And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him and entered into his house; and he made them a feast and did bake unleavened bread; and they did eat.
19:6 But before they lay down to rest, the men of the city of Sodom compassed the house round, even men which were both old and young, even the people from every quarter.
19:7 And they called unto Lot and said unto him, Where are the men which came in unto thee this night? Bring them out unto us that we may know them.
19:8 And Lot went out of the door unto them, and shut the door after him, and said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.
19:9 And they said unto him, Stand back. And they were angry with him.
19:10 And they said among themselves, This one man came in to sojourn among us, and he will needs now make himself to be a judge; now we will deal worse with him than with them.
19:11 Wherefore, they said unto the man, We will have the men and thy daughters also; and we will do with them as seemeth us good.
19:12 Now this was after the wickedness of Sodom.
19:13 And Lot said, Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, plead with my brethren that I may not bring them out unto you, and ye shall not do unto them as seemeth good in your eyes.
19:14 For God will not justify his servant in this thing; wherefore, let me plead with my brethren this once only, that unto these men ye do nothing, that they may have peace in my house; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
19:15 And they were angry with Lot and came near to break the door; but the angels of God, which were holy men, put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house unto them, and shut the door.
19:16 And they smote the men with blindness, both small and great, that they could not come at the door.
19:17 And they were angry, so that they wearied themselves to find the door, and could not find it.
19:18 And these holy men said unto Lot, Hast thou any here besides thy sons-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters?
19:19 And they commanded Lot, saying, Whatsoever thou hast in the city, thou shalt bring out of this place, for we will destroy this place,
19:20 Because the cry of them is waxen great, and their abominations have come up before the face of the Lord; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy it.
19:21 And Lot went out and spake unto his sons-in-law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get ye out of this place, for the Lord will destroy this city.
19:22 But he seemed as one that mocked, unto his sons-in-law.
19:23 And when the morning came, the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise. Take thy wife and thy two daughters which are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
19:24 And while he lingered, the angels laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters--the Lord being merciful unto them--and they brought them forth and set them down without the city.
19:25 And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that they said unto them, Escape for your lives; look not behind you, neither stay you in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest you be consumed.
19:26 And Lot said unto one of them, Oh, not so, my Lord! Behold now, thy servant has found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy which thou hast showed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil overtake me, and I die.
19:27 Behold now, here is another city, and this is near to flee unto, and it is a little one. Oh, let me escape thither, and may the Lord not destroy it, and my soul shall live.
19:28 And the angel said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken; haste thee, escape thither, for I cannot do anything until thou be come thither.
19:29 And the name of the city was called Zoar. Therefore, the sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
19:30 And the Lord did not destroy Sodom until Lot had entered into Zoar.
19:31 And then, when Lot had entered into Zoar, the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah; for the angels called upon the name of the Lord for brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.
19:32 And thus they overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.
19:33 But it came to pass, when Lot fled, his wife looked back from behind him and became a pillar of salt.
19:34 And Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord; and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah and toward all the land of the plain; and behold, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
19:35 And it came to pass, when God had destroyed the cities of the plain, that God spake unto Abraham, saying, I have remembered Lot and sent him out of the midst of the overthrow, that thy brother might not be destroyed when I overthrew the city in the which thy brother Lot dwelt.
19:36 And Abraham was comforted. And Lot went up out of Zoar and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar. And he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
19:37 And the firstborn dealt wickedly and said unto the younger, Our father has become old, and we have not a man on the earth to come in unto us, to live with us after the manner of all that live on the earth.
19:38 Therefore, come, let us make our father drink wine; and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
19:39 And they did wickedly and made their father drink wine that night; and the firstborn went in and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down nor when she arose.
19:40 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father; let us make him drink wine this night also, and go thou in and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
19:41 And they made their father drink wine that night also; and the younger arose and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down nor when she arose.
19:42 Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
19:43 And the firstborn bare a son and called his name Moab, the father of the Moabites, the same which are unto this day.
19:44 And the younger, she also bare a son and called his name Ben-ammi, the father of the children which are Ammonites, the same which are unto this day.
Chapter 20
Abraham and Sarah go to Gerar--Abimelech reproves them for their deception
20:1 And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.
20:2 And Abraham said again of Sarah, his wife, She is my sister.
20:3 And Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent and took Sarah. But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night and said unto him, Behold, thou hast taken a woman which is not thine own; for she is Abraham's wife.
20:4 And the Lord said unto him, Thou shalt return her unto Abraham; for if thou do it not, thou shalt die.
20:5 And Abimelech had not come near her, for the Lord had not suffered him.
20:6 And he said, Lord, wilt thou slay me and also a righteous nation? Behold, said he not unto me, She is my sister? And she, even she herself, said, He is my brother. And in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.
20:7 And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst do this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me; therefore suffered I not thee to touch her.
20:8 Now, therefore, restore the man's wife to him, for he is a prophet; and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live; and if thou restore her not to him, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou and all that are thine.
20:9 Therefore, Abimelech arose early in the morning, and called his servants, and told all these things in their ears; and the men were sore afraid.
20:10 Then Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? And in what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin?
20:11 Thou hast done things unto me that ought not to be done. And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?
20:12 And Abraham said, Because I thought assuredly the fear of God was not in this place and they would slay me for my wife's sake;
20:13 And yet, indeed, she was my sister; she was the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
20:14 And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This shall be thy kindness which thou shalt show unto me: At every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
20:15 And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and menservants and women servants, and gave unto Abraham, and restored unto him Sarah his wife.
20:16 And Abimelech said, Behold, my land lieth before thee; dwell where it pleaseth thee.
20:17 And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver; behold, he shall give unto thee a covering of the eyes, and it shall be a token unto all that thou mayest not be taken again from Abraham, thy husband. And thus she was reproved.
20:18 So Abraham prayed unto God; and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants, and they bare unto him children.
20:19 For because of Sarah, Abraham's wife, the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech.
Chapter 21
Isaac born to Abraham and Sarah--Hagar and Ishmael cast out--Covenant with Abimelech at Beer-sheba
21:1 And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken by the mouth of his angels; for Sarah conceived and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which the angels of God had spoken to him.
21:2 And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare unto him, Isaac.
21:3 And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac, he being eight days old, as God had commanded him.
21:4 And Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born unto him.
21:5 And Sarah said, God has made me to rejoice; and also all that know me will rejoice with me.
21:6 And she said unto Abraham, Who would have said that Sarah should have given children suck? For I was barren, but the Lord promised, and I have borne unto Abraham a son in his old age.
21:7 And the child grew and was weaned. And the day that Isaac was weaned, Abraham made a great feast; and Sarah saw the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, which Hagar had borne unto Abraham, mocking; and she was troubled.
21:8 Wherefore, she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son; for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, Isaac.
21:9 And this thing was very grievous unto Abraham because of his son.
21:10 And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
21:11 And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation because he is thy seed.
21:12 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle of water, and gave unto Hagar; and she took the child, and he sent her away; and she departed and wandered in the wilderness of Beer-sheba.
21:13 And it came to pass that the water was spent in the bottle; and she cast the child under one of the shrubs, and she went and sat her down over against the child, a good way off, as it were a bowshot; for she said, Let me not see the death of the child.
21:14 And she sat over against the child, and lifted up her voice, and wept.
21:15 And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of the Lord called to Hagar out of heaven and said unto her,
21:16 What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear not, for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he lieth. Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand, for I will make of him a great nation.
21:17 And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.
21:18 And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer; and he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran, he and his mother.
21:19 And he took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.
21:20 And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phicol, the chief captain of his host, spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest.
21:21 Now, therefore, swear unto me here that, by the help of God, thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son; but that, according to the kindness that I have shown unto thee, thou shalt do unto me and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
21:22 And Abraham said, I will swear.
21:23 And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.
21:24 And Abimelech said, Thou didst not tell me; and I know not who hath done this thing; neither yet have I heard that it was done until this day.
21:25 And Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.
21:26 And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
21:27 And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What wilt thou do with these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?
21:28 And he said, Seven ewe lambs shalt thou take at my hand, that they may be a witness unto me that I have digged this well.
21:29 And because they sware, both of them, wherefore he called that place Beer-sheba;
21:30 And thus they made a covenant at Beer-sheba.
21:31 Then Abimelech and Phicol, the chief captain of his hosts, rose up, and they planted a grove in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of the Lord; and they returned unto the land of the Philistines.
21:32 And Abraham worshiped the everlasting God and sojourned in the land of the Philistines many days.
Chapter 22
Abraham commanded to sacrifice Isaac--God provides the sacrifice, and Abraham is blessed--Nahor's children
22:1 And it came to pass after these things, that God did try Abraham and said unto him, Abraham. And Abraham said, Behold, here am I.
22:2 And the Lord said, Take now thy son, thine only Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains of which I will tell thee.
22:3 And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son,
22:4 And clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.
22:5 Then on the third day, Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place afar off.
22:6 And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide you here with the ass, and I and the lad will go yonder, and worship, and come to you again.
22:7 And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering and laid it upon his back; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife, and Isaac his son; and they went both of them together.
22:8 And Isaac spake unto Abraham, his father, and said, My father! And he said, Here am I, my son.
22:9 And he said, Behold the fire and the wood. But where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
22:10 And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering. So they went both of them together, and they came to the place of which God had told him.
22:11 And Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac, his son, and laid him on the altar, upon the wood.
22:12 And Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the knife to slay his son.
22:13 And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven and said, Abraham! Abraham! And Abraham said, Here am I.
22:14 And the angel said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him;
22:15 For now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only Isaac, from me.
22:16 And Abraham lifted up his eyes and looked; and behold, behind a thicket, there was a ram caught in it by his horns.
22:17 And Abraham went, and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.
22:18 And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh, as it is said unto this day: In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.
22:19 And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time and said,
22:20 Thus saith the Lord, I have sworn by myself that because thou hast done this thing and hast not withheld thy son, thine only Isaac, from me,
22:21 That in blessing I will bless thee; and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven and as the sand which is upon the seashore.
22:22 And thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed because thou hast obeyed my voice.
22:23 So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went to Beer-sheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba.
22:24 And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying,
22:25 Behold, Milcah, she hath also borne children unto thy brother Nahor; Huz is his firstborn, and Buz is his brother.
22:26 And Kemuel is the father of Aram, and Chesed, and Haza, and Bildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel;
22:27 And Bethuel begat Rebekah.
22:28 These eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother; and his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, Thahash, and Maachah.
Chapter 23
Sarah's death and burial
23:1 And Sarah was a hundred and twenty-seven years old, and she died; and thus ended the years of the life of Sarah.
23:2 And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba; the same is now called Hebron in the land of Canaan.
23:3 And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and to weep for her, his wife which was dead.
23:4 And Abraham stood up from before his dead and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying, I am a stranger and a sojourner with you; give me a possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
23:5 And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, Hear us, my lord; thou art a mighty prince among us; in the choicest of our sepulchers bury thou thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulcher, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
23:6 And Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the land, and to the children of Heth; and he communed with them, saying,
23:7 If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight, hear me and entreat Ephron, the son of Zohar, for me, that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath in the end of his field;
23:8 For as much money as it is worth, he shall have if he will give it me for a possession of a burying place among you.
23:9 And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth.
23:10 And Ephron, the Hittite, answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, among all of them that went in at the gates of the city, saying,
23:11 Hearken, my lord, and hear me; the field I give thee and the cave that is therein; I give it thee in the presence of the sons of my people; and I give it thee; therefore, bury thy dead.
23:12 And Abraham bowed himself down before the people of the land, and he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, I pray thee, hear me;
23:13 If thou wilt take it of me, I will give thee money for the field, and I will bury my dead there; but I will give thee money for it.
23:14 And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him, My lord, hearken unto me; the land thou shalt have for four hundred shekels of silver. What shall that be betwixt me and thee? Bury, therefore, thy dead.
23:15 And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed unto Ephron the silver which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, which was current with the merchant.
23:16 And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field and that were in all the borders round about were made sure unto Abraham for a possession, in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of the city.
23:17 And after this, Abraham buried Sarah, his wife, in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre; the same is called Hebron in the land of Canaan.
23:18 And the field and the cave that was therein were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sons of Heth.
Chapter 24
Abraham's servant selects a wife for Isaac--Betrothal and marriage of Isaac and Rebekah
24:1 And now Abraham was old, being well stricken in age; and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things.
24:2 And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had: Put forth, I pray thee, thy hand under my hand, and I will make thee swear before the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I dwell; but thou shalt go unto my country and to my kindred and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
24:3 And the servant said unto him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land; then I must needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest.
24:4 And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.
24:5 The Lord God of heaven--which took me from my father's house and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thee will I give this land--
24:6 He shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.
24:7 And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this thine oath; only bring not my son thither again.
24:8 And the servant put his hand under the hand of Abraham, his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.
24:9 And the servant took ten camels of his master and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand.
24:10 And he arose and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.
24:11 And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at evening, the time that women go out to draw water.
24:12 And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee this day, that thou wouldest show kindness unto my master Abraham and send me good speed.
24:13 Behold, I stand by the well of water, and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water;
24:14 And let it come to pass that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, let her be the one whom thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac. And thereby shall I know that thou hast showed kindness unto my master.
24:15 And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
24:16 And the damsel, being a virgin, very fair to look upon, such as the servant of Abraham had not seen, neither had any man known the like unto her, and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
24:17 And the servant ran to meet her and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.
24:18 And she said, Drink, my lord; and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
24:19 And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw for thy camels also until they have done drinking.
24:20 And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw, and drew for all his camels.
24:21 And the man, wondering at her, held his peace, pondering in his heart whether the Lord had made his journey prosperous or not.
24:22 And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a gold earring of half a shekel weight and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold, and said, Whose daughter art thou? Tell me, I pray thee. And is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
24:23 And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.
24:24 She said, moreover, unto him, We have both straw, and provender enough, and room to lodge in.
24:25 And the man bowed down his head and worshiped the Lord.
24:26 And he said, Blessed is the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left my master destitute of his mercy and his truth; and when I was in the way, the Lord led me to the house of my master's brethren.
24:27 And the damsel ran to the house and told her mother these things.
24:28 And Rebekah had a brother, whose name was Laban; and Laban ran out to the man, unto the well.
24:29 And it came to pass when he saw the earrings, and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah, his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me, and I came unto the man, and behold, he stood by the camels at the well,
24:30 And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord. Wherefore standest thou without? For I have prepared the house and room for the camels.
24:31 And the man came into the house.
24:32 And he unburdened his camels and gave straw, and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet and the men's feet that came with him.
24:33 And there was set before him food to eat; but he said, I will not eat until I have told mine errand.
24:34 And Laban said, Speak on. And he said, I am Abraham's servant;
24:35 And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly, and he is become great; and he hath given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, and menservants and maidservants, and camels and asses.
24:36 And Sarah, my master's wife, bare a son to my master when she was old; and unto him hath he given all that he hath.
24:37 And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell;
24:38 But thou shalt go unto my father's house and to my kindred and take a wife unto my son.
24:39 And I said unto my master, Perhaps the woman will not follow me.
24:40 And he said unto me, The Lord, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee; and he will prosper thy way;
24:41 And thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred and of my father's house; then shalt thou be clear of my oath.
24:42 When thou comest to my kindred, and if they give thee not a wife for my son, thou shalt be clear from my oath.
24:43 And I came this day unto the well and said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now thou wilt prosper my way which I go,
24:44 Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink,
24:45 And if she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels, the same is the woman whom the Lord hath appointed out for my master's son.
24:46 And before I had done speaking in my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well and drew water.
24:47 And I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.
24:48 And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also. So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
24:49 And I asked her and said, Whose daughter art thou?
24:50 And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him.
24:51 And I gave the earrings unto her to put into her ears and the bracelets upon her hands.
24:52 And I bowed down my head, and worshiped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.
24:53 And now, if thou wilt deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me; and if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand or to the left.
24:54 Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the Lord; we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
24:55 Behold, Rebekah is before thee. Take her and go; and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the Lord hath spoken.
24:56 And it came to pass that, when Abraham's servant heard these words, he worshiped the Lord, bowing himself to the earth.
24:57 And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave to Rebekah. He gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.
24:58 And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night.
24:59 And they arose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.
24:60 And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us at the least ten days; after that she shall go.
24:61 And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way; send me away, that I may go unto my master.
24:62 And they said, We will call the damsel and inquire at her mouth.
24:63 And they called Rebekah and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man?
24:64 And she said, I will go. And they sent away Rebekah, their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.
24:65 And they blessed Rebekah and said unto her, O thou, our sister, be thou blessed of thousands--of millions; and let thy seed possess the gate of those who hate them.
24:66 And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels and followed the man; and the servant took Rebekah and went his way.
24:67 And Isaac came from the way of the well La-hai-roi; for he dwelt in the south country.
24:68 And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at eventide; and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and beheld the camels coming.
24:69 And Rebekah lifted up her eyes; and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel; for she said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us?
24:70 And the servant said, It is my master; therefore, she took a veil and covered herself.
24:71 And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
24:72 And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent and took Rebekah; and she became his wife, and he loved her.
24:73 And Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
Chapter 25
Abraham marries Keturah--Abraham dies--Generations of Ishmael and Isaac--Birth of Esau and Jacob--Esau sells his birthright
25:1 Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
25:2 And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
25:3 And Jokshan begat Sheba and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
25:4 And the sons of Midian: Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.
25:5 And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
25:6 But unto the sons of the concubines which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts and sent them away from Isaac, his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
25:7 And these are the number of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, a hundred threescore and fifteen years.
25:8 Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man and full of years, and was gathered to his people.
25:9 And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar, the Hittite, which is before Mamre,
25:10 The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth; there was Abraham buried and Sarah his wife.
25:11 And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well La-hai-roi.
25:12 Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham;
25:13 And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth, and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
25:14 And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
25:15 Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
25:16 These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names by their towns and by their castles--twelve princes according to their nations.
25:17 And these are the number of the years of the life of Ishmael, a hundred and thirty and seven years; and he gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people.
25:18 And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria; and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
25:19 And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begat Isaac;
25:20 And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel, the Syrian of Padan-aram, the sister to Laban, the Syrian.
25:21 And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, that she might bear children, because she was barren. And the Lord was entreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
25:22 And the children struggled together within her womb; and she said, If I am with child, why is it thus with me? And she went to inquire of the Lord.
25:23 And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.
25:24 And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
25:25 And the first came out red all over like a hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.
25:26 And after that, came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel; and his name was called Jacob; and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.
25:27 And the boys grew; and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.
25:28 And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison; but Rebekah loved Jacob.
25:29 And Jacob sod pottage; and Esau came from the field, and he was faint;
25:30 And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint; therefore was his name called Edom.
25:31 And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
25:32 And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point of dying. And what shall this birthright profit me?
25:33 And Jacob said, Swear to me this day. And he swore unto him, and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
25:34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils; and he did eat, and drink, and rose up, and went his way. Thus Esau despised his birthright.
Chapter 26
Isaac goes to Gerar and prospers--Conflicts with herdmen resolved--Esau takes two wives
26:1 And there was a famine in the land besides the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech, king of the Philistines, unto Gerar.
26:2 And the Lord appeared unto him and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of.
26:3 Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee and unto thy seed I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham, thy father;
26:4 And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
26:5 Because that Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.
26:6 And Isaac dwelt in Gerar.
26:7 And the men of the place asked him concerning his wife. And he said, She is my sister; for he feared to say, She is my wife, lest the men of the place should kill him for to get Rebekah because she was fair to look upon.
26:8 And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looked out at a window and saw--and behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah, his wife.
26:9 And Abimelech called Isaac and said, Behold, of a surety Rebekah is thy wife. And how saidst thou she is thy sister? And Isaac said unto him, I said it because I feared lest I die for her.
26:10 And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? One of the people might lightly have lain with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
26:11 And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.
26:12 Then Isaac sowed in that land and received in the same year a hundredfold; and the Lord blessed him.
26:13 And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great;
26:14 For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants; and the Philistines envied him.
26:15 For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the days of Abraham, his father, the Philistines had stopped them and filled them with earth.
26:16 And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.
26:17 And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.
26:18 And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham; and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
26:19 And Isaac's servants digged in the valley and found there a well of springing water.
26:20 And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours; and he called the name of the well Esek because they strove with him.
26:21 And they digged another well and strove for that also; and he called the name of it Sitnah.
26:22 And he removed from thence and digged another well; and for that they strove not; and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the Lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.
26:23 And he went up from thence to Beer-sheba.
26:24 And the Lord appeared unto him the same night and said, I am the God of Abraham, thy father; fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.
26:25 And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent there; and there Isaac's servants digged a well.
26:26 Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath, one of his friends, and Phichol, the chief captain of his army.
26:27 And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me and have sent me away from you?
26:28 And they said, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee; and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee,
26:29 That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace; thou art now the blessed of the Lord.
26:30 And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
26:31 And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another; and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
26:32 And it came to pass the same day that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.
26:33 And he called it Sheba; therefore, the name of the city is Beer-sheba unto this day.
26:34 And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith, the daughter of Beeri, the Hittite, and Bashemath, the daughter of Elon, the Hittite,
26:35 Which was a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
Chapter 27
Jacob by stratagem obtains his brother's blessing
27:1 And it came to pass that when Isaac was old and his eyes were dim so that he could not see, he called Esau, his eldest son, and said unto him, My son. And he said unto him, Behold, here am I.
27:2 And he said, Behold, now I am old; I know not the day of my death;
27:3 Now, therefore, take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field and take me some venison,
27:4 And make me savory meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat, that my soul may bless thee before I die.
27:5 And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau, his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison and to bring it.
27:6 And Rebekah spake unto Jacob, her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau, thy brother, saying,
27:7 Bring me venison and make me savory meat, that I may eat and bless thee before the Lord before my death.
27:8 Now, therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.
27:9 Go now to the flock and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make them savory meat for thy father, such as he loveth;
27:10 And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat and that he may bless thee before his death.
27:11 And Jacob said to Rebekah, his mother, Behold, Esau, my brother, is a hairy man; and I am a smooth man;
27:12 My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me and not a blessing.
27:13 And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son; only obey my voice and go fetch me them.
27:14 And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother; and his mother made savory meat, such as his father loved.
27:15 And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob, her younger son;
27:16 And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands and upon the smooth of his neck;
27:17 And she gave the savory meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
27:18 And he came unto his father and said, My father. And he said, Here am I. Who art thou, my son?
27:19 And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau, thy firstborn; I have done according as thou badest me; arise, I pray thee, sit, and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
27:20 And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the Lord, thy God, brought it to me.
27:21 And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.
27:22 And Jacob went near unto Isaac, his father; and he felt him and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
27:23 And he discerned him not because his hands were hairy as his brother Esau's hands; so he blessed him.
27:24 And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
27:25 And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat; and he brought him wine, and he drank.
27:26 And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now and kiss me, my son.
27:27 And he came near and kissed him. And he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed;
27:28 Therefore, God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine;
27:29 Let people serve thee and nations bow down to thee; be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee; cursed be everyone that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.
27:30 And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac, his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
27:31 And he also had made savory meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.
27:32 And Isaac, his father, said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau.
27:33 And Isaac trembled very exceedingly and said, Who? Where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? Yea, and he shall be blessed.
27:34 And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
27:35 And he said, Thy brother came with subtlety and hath taken away thy blessing.
27:36 And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? For he hath supplanted me these two times: He took away my birthright; and behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
27:37 And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him. And what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
27:38 And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice and wept.
27:39 And Isaac, his father, answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth and of the dew of heaven from above;
27:40 And by thy sword shalt thou live and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.
27:41 And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him; and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.
27:42 And these words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebekah; and she sent and called Jacob, her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.
27:43 Now, therefore, my son, obey my voice and arise; flee thou to Laban, my brother, to Haran,
27:44 And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away,
27:45 Until thy brother's anger turn away from thee and he forget that which thou hast done to him; then I will send and fetch thee from thence. Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?
27:46 And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth; if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?
Chapter 28
Isaac blesses Jacob--Vision of Jacob's ladder--Stone of Bethel--Jacob's vow
28:1 And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
28:2 Arise, go to Padan-aram, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother.
28:3 And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people,
28:4 And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee and to thy seed with thee, that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
28:5 And Isaac sent away Jacob; and he went to Padan-aram unto Laban, son of Bethuel, the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob and Esau's mother.
28:6 When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to Padan-aram to take him a wife from thence, and that, as he blessed him, he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,
28:7 And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and was gone to Padan-aram,
28:8 And Esau, seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father,
28:9 Then went Esau unto Ishmael and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.
28:10 And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba and went toward Haran.
28:11 And he lighted upon a certain place and tarried there all night because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
28:12 And he dreamed: and behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven, and behold, the angels of God ascending and descending upon it.
28:13 And behold, the Lord stood above it and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed;
28:14 And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
28:15 And behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.
28:16 And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place; and I knew it not.
28:17 And he was afraid and said, How dreadful is this place! This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
28:18 And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
28:19 And he called the name of that place Bethel; but the name of that city was called Luz at the first.
28:20 And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on,
28:21 So that I come again to my father's house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God;
28:22 And the place of this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be the place of God's house; and of all that thou shalt give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee.
Chapter 29
Jacob goes to Laban--Jacob serves seven years for Rachel--He is deceived by Laban--Jacob marries Leah and Rachel--Leah bears Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah
29:1 Then Jacob went on his journey and came into the land of the people of the east.
29:2 And he looked and beheld a well in the field; and lo, there were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks; and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.
29:3 And thither were all the flocks gathered; and they rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place.
29:4 And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, from whence are ye? And they said, From Haran.
29:5 And he said unto them, Know ye Laban, the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.
29:6 And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well; and behold, Rachel, his daughter, cometh with the sheep.
29:7 And he said, Lo, it is yet high day; neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together; water ye the sheep, and go, and feed them.
29:8 And they said, We cannot until all the flocks be gathered together and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we water the sheep.
29:9 And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep; for she kept them.
29:10 And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban, his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban, his mother's brother.
29:11 And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
29:12 And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother and that he was Rebekah's son; and she ran and told her father.
29:13 And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob, his sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.
29:14 And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.
29:15 And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for naught? Tell me, what shall thy wages be?
29:16 And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.
29:17 Leah was tender-eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well-favored.
29:18 And Jacob loved Rachel and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel, thy younger daughter.
29:19 And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee than that I should give her to another man; abide with me.
29:20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her.
29:21 And Jacob said unto Laban, Give unto me my wife, that I may go and take her, for my days of serving thee are fulfilled.
29:22 And Laban gave her to Jacob, and gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
29:23 And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah, his daughter, and brought her to Jacob; and she went in and slept with him.
29:24 And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah, Zilpah, his handmaid, to be a handmaid for her.
29:25 And it came to pass that in the morning, behold, it was Leah. And he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? Did not I serve with thee for Rachel? Wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
29:26 And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn.
29:27 Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
29:28 And Jacob did so and fulfilled her week; and he gave him Rachel, his daughter, to wife also.
29:29 And Laban gave to Rachel, his daughter, Bilhah, his handmaid, to be her maid.
29:30 And he went in also and slept with Rachel; and he loved Rachel also, more than Leah, and served with Laban yet seven other years.
29:31 And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb; but Rachel was barren.
29:32 And Leah conceived and bare a son; and she called his name Reuben; for she said, Surely the Lord hath looked upon my affliction; now, therefore, my husband will love me.
29:33 And she conceived again, and bare a son, and said, Because the Lord hath heard that I was hated, he hath, therefore, given me this son also; and she called his name Simeon.
29:34 And she conceived again, and bare a son, and said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me because I have borne him three sons; therefore was his name called Levi.
29:35 And she conceived again and bare a son; and she said, Now will I praise the Lord; therefore, she called his name Judah and left bearing.
Chapter 30
Rachel and Leah give their maids to Jacob--Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Zebulon, and Issachar are born--Rachel bears Joseph--Jacob's herds prosper
30:1 And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
30:2 And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel; and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
30:3 And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah; go in and lie with her; and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.
30:4 And she gave him Bilhah, her handmaid, to wife; and Jacob went and lay with her.
30:5 And Bilhah conceived and bare Jacob a son.
30:6 And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son; therefore called she his name Dan.
30:7 And Bilhah, Rachel's maid, conceived again and bare Jacob a second son.
30:8 And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed; and she called his name Naphtali.
30:9 When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah, her maid, and gave her unto Jacob to wife.
30:10 And Zilpah, Leah's maid, bare Jacob a son.
30:11 And Leah said, A troop cometh; and she called his name Gad.
30:12 And Zilpah, Leah's maid, bare Jacob a second son.
30:13 And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed; and she called his name Asher.
30:14 And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
30:15 And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? And wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore, he shall lie with thee tonight for thy son's mandrakes.
30:16 And Jacob came out of the field in the evening; and Leah went out to meet him and said, Thou must come in and lie with me; for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.
30:17 And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son.
30:18 And Leah said, God hath given me my hire because I have given my maiden to my husband; and she called his name Issachar.
30:19 And Leah conceived again and bare Jacob the sixth son.
30:20 And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have borne him six sons; and she called his name Zebulun.
30:21 And afterwards she bare a daughter and called her name Dinah.
30:22 And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her and opened her womb.
30:23 And she conceived, and bare a son, and said, God hath taken away my reproach;
30:24 And she called his name Joseph and said, The Lord shall add to me another son.
30:25 And it came to pass, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place and to my country.
30:26 Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go; for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.
30:27 And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favor in thine eyes, tarry; for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.
30:28 And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
30:29 And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee and how thy cattle was with me.
30:30 For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming. And now, when shall I provide for mine own house also?
30:31 And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me anything; if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock.
30:32 I will pass through all thy flock today, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats; and of such shall be my hire.
30:33 So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come when it shall come for my hire before thy face; every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.
30:34 And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.
30:35 And he removed that day the he goats that were ring-streaked and spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
30:36 And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob; and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
30:37 And Jacob took him rods of green poplar and of the hazel and chestnut tree, and pilled white streaks in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
30:38 And he set the rods, which he had pilled, before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
30:39 And the flocks conceived before the rods and brought forth cattle ring-streaked, speckled, and spotted.
30:40 And Jacob did separate the lambs and set the faces of the flocks toward the ring-streaked and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves and put them not unto Laban's cattle.
30:41 And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.
30:42 But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in; so the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
30:43 And the man increased exceedingly and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.
Chapter 31
Jacob departs secretly; Laban pursues--God speaks to Laban--Jacob and Laban covenant
31:1 And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.
31:2 And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and behold, it was not toward him as before.
31:3 And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.
31:4 And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
31:5 And said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me.
31:6 And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
31:7 And your father hath deceived me and changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.
31:8 If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages, then all the cattle bare speckled; and if he said thus, The ring-streaked shall be thy hire, then bare all the cattle ring-streaked.
31:9 Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father and given them to me.
31:10 And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes and saw in a dream; and behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ring-streaked, speckled, and grizzled.
31:11 And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob. And I said, Here am I.
31:12 And he said, Lift up now thine eyes and see--all the rams which leap upon the cattle are ring-streaked, speckled, and grizzled; for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
31:13 I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar and where thou vowedst a vow unto me; now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
31:14 And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
31:15 Are we not counted of him strangers? For he hath sold us and hath quite devoured also our money.
31:16 For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is ours and our children's; now then whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.
31:17 Then Jacob rose up and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
31:18 And he carried away all his cattle and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padan-aram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
31:19 And Laban went to shear his sheep; and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father's.
31:20 And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban, the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.
31:21 So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.
31:22 And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled.
31:23 And he took his brethren with him and pursued after him seven days' journey, and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.
31:24 And God came to Laban, the Syrian, in a dream by night and said unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
31:25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount; and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.
31:26 And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me and carried away my daughters as captives taken with the sword?
31:27 Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me, and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
31:28 And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? Thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
31:29 It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt; but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
31:30 And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
31:31 And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid; for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.
31:32 With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live; before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.
31:33 And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of Leah's tent and entered into Rachel's tent.
31:34 Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent but found them not.
31:35 And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched but found not the images.
31:36 And Jacob was wroth and chided with Laban. And Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? What is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
31:37 Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? Set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.
31:38 This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
31:39 That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day or stolen by night.
31:40 Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
31:41 Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters and six years for thy cattle; and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
31:42 Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath seen my affliction and the labor of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.
31:43 And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mine. And what can I do this day unto these my daughters or unto their children which they have borne?
31:44 Now, therefore, come thou. Let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
31:45 And Jacob took a stone and set it up for a pillar.
31:46 And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones and made a heap; and they did eat there upon the heap.
31:47 And Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha; but Jacob called it Galeed.
31:48 And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed,
31:49 And Mizpah; for he said, The Lord watch between me and thee when we are absent one from another.
31:50 If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness betwixt me and thee.
31:51 And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap and behold this pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee;
31:52 This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me for harm.
31:53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.
31:54 Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount and called his brethren to eat bread; and they did eat bread and tarried all night in the mount.
31:55 And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them; and Laban departed and returned unto his place.
Chapter 32
Angels meet Jacob--Jacob sends gifts to Esau--An angel wrestles with Jacob--He is called Israel
32:1 And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
32:2 And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host; and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.
32:3 And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau, his brother, unto the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
32:4 And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau: Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban and stayed there until now;
32:5 And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and women servants; and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight.
32:6 And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
32:7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed; and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands,
32:8 And said, If Esau come to the one company and smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.
32:9 And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee,
32:10 I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all the truth which thou hast showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.
32:11 Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me and the mothers with the children.
32:12 And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.
32:13 And he lodged there that same night and took of that which came to his hand a present for Esau, his brother:
32:14 Two hundred she goats and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
32:15 Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine and ten bulls, twenty she asses and ten foals.
32:16 And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves, and said unto his servants, Pass over before me and put a space betwixt drove and drove.
32:17 And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau, my brother, meeteth thee and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? And whither goest thou? And whose are these before thee?
32:18 Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord Esau; and behold, also he is behind us.
32:19 And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau when ye find him.
32:20 And say ye, moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.
32:21 So went the present over before him; and himself lodged that night in the company.
32:22 And he rose up that night and took his two wives, and his two women servants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.
32:23 And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.
32:24 And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day.
32:25 And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint as he wrestled with him.
32:26 And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.
32:27 And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.
32:28 And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men and hast prevailed.
32:29 And Jacob asked him and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.
32:30 And Jacob called the name of the place Penuel, for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
32:31 And as he passed over Penuel, the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.
32:32 Therefore, the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.
Chapter 33
Jacob and Esau meet and reconcile
33:1 And Jacob lifted up his eyes and looked; and behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.
33:2 And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
33:3 And he passed over before them and bowed himself to the ground seven times until he came near to his brother.
33:4 And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him; and they wept.
33:5 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children, and said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.
33:6 Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.
33:7 And Leah also with her children came near and bowed themselves; and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
33:8 And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
33:9 And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.
33:10 And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand; for, therefore, I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.
33:11 Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.
33:12 And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go; and I will go before thee.
33:13 And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me; and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.
33:14 Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant; and I will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.
33:15 And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What needeth it? Let me find grace in the sight of my lord.
33:16 So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
33:17 And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him a house, and made booths for his cattle; therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.
33:18 And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padan-aram, and pitched his tent before the city.
33:19 And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for a hundred pieces of money.
33:20 And he erected there an altar and called it El-Elohe-Israel.
Chapter 34
Dinah is ravished by Shechem--Shechemites circumcised and slain--Jacob reproves Simeon and Levi
34:1 And Dinah, the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.
34:2 And when Shechem, the son of Hamor, the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.
34:3 And his soul clave unto Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel and spake kindly unto the damsel.
34:4 And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
34:5 And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah, his daughter; now his sons were with his cattle in the field; and Jacob held his peace until they were come.
34:6 And Hamor, the father of Shechem, went out unto Jacob to commune with him.
34:7 And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it; and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter, which thing ought not to be done.
34:8 And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter; I pray you, give her him to wife.
34:9 And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.
34:10 And ye shall dwell with us; and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.
34:11 And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.
34:12 Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me; but give me the damsel to wife.
34:13 And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor, his father, deceitfully and said (because he had defiled Dinah, their sister),
34:14 And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us;
34:15 But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised,
34:16 Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us; and we will dwell with you, and we will become one people.
34:17 But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised, then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.
34:18 And their words pleased Hamor and Shechem, Hamor's son.
34:19 And the young man deferred not to do the thing because he had delight in Jacob's daughter; and he was more honorable than all the house of his father.
34:20 And Hamor and Shechem, his son, came unto the gate of their city and communed with the men of their city, saying,
34:21 These men are peaceable with us; therefore, let them dwell in the land and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.
34:22 Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised as they are circumcised.
34:23 Shall not their cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? Only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.
34:24 And unto Hamor and unto Shechem, his son, hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.
34:25 And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.
34:26 And they slew Hamor and Shechem, his son, with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out.
34:27 The sons of Jacob came upon the slain and spoiled the city because they had defiled their sister.
34:28 They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,
34:29 And all their wealth, and all their little ones; and their wives took they captive and spoiled even all that was in the house.
34:30 And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me, to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites; and I, being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
34:31 And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with a harlot?
Chapter 35
God sends Jacob to Bethel--He purges his house of idols and builds an altar--God blesses Jacob and names him Israel--Rachel bears Benjamin, then dies--Isaac dies
35:1 And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there; and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau, thy brother.
35:2 Then Jacob said unto his household and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments;
35:3 And let us arise and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress and was with me in the way which I went.
35:4 And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
35:5 And they journeyed; and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
35:6 So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel, he and all the people that were with him.
35:7 And he built there an altar and called the place El-beth-el because there God appeared unto him when he fled from the face of his brother.
35:8 But Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died; and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak; and the name of it was called Allon-bachuth.
35:9 And God appeared unto Jacob again when he came out of Padan-aram and blessed him.
35:10 And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob; thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name; and he called his name Israel.
35:11 And God said unto him, I am God Almighty; be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;
35:12 And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.
35:13 And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.
35:14 And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone; and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.
35:15 And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him, Bethel.
35:16 And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath; and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labor.
35:17 And it came to pass, when she was in hard labor, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.
35:18 And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing (for she died), that she called his name Ben-oni; but his father called him Benjamin.
35:19 And Rachel died and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.
35:20 And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave; that is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.
35:21 And Israel journeyed and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.
35:22 And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah, his father's concubine; and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:
35:23 The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun;
35:24 The sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin;
35:25 And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid: Dan and Naphtali;
35:26 And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padan-aram.
35:27 And Jacob came unto Isaac, his father, unto Mamre, unto the city of Arba, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
35:28 And the days of Isaac were a hundred and fourscore years.
35:29 And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of days; and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.
Chapter 36
Esau's three wives--His sons become Edomites
36:1 Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom:
36:2 Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan: Adah, the daughter of Elon, the Hittite, and Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, the Hivite,
36:3 And Bashemath, Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
36:4 And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;
36:5 And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah; these are the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.
36:6 And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan, and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.
36:7 For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
36:8 Thus dwelt Esau in Mount Seir; Esau is Edom.
36:9 And these are the generations of Esau, the father of the Edomites, in Mount Seir:
36:10 These are the names of Esau's sons: Eliphaz, the son of Adah, the wife of Esau; Reuel, the son of Bashemath, the wife of Esau.
36:11 And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
36:12 And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek; these were the sons of Adah, Esau's wife.
36:13 And these are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah; these were the sons of Bashemath, Esau's wife.
36:14 And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: And she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
36:15 These were dukes of the sons of Esau, the sons of Eliphaz, the firstborn son of Esau: duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,
36:16 Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek; these are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.
36:17 And these are the sons of Reuel, Esau's son: duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah; these are the dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath, Esau's wife.
36:18 And these are the sons of Aholibamah, Esau's wife: duke Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah; these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
36:19 These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.
36:20 These are the sons of Seir, the Horite, who inhabited the land: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
36:21 And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan; these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
36:22 And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's sister was Timna.
36:23 And the children of Shobal were these: Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
36:24 And these are the children of Zibeon: both Ajah and Anah; this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness as he fed the asses of Zibeon, his father.
36:25 And the children of Anah were these: Dishon and Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah.
36:26 And these are the children of Dishon: Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
36:27 The children of Ezer are these: Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
36:28 The children of Dishan are these: Uz and Aran.
36:29 These are the dukes that came of the Horites: duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,
36:30 Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan; these are the dukes that came of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir.
36:31 And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
36:32 And Bela, the son of Beor, reigned in Edom; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
36:33 And Bela died, and Jobab, the son of Zerah of Bozrah, reigned in his stead.
36:34 And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.
36:35 And Husham died, and Hadad, the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Avith.
36:36 And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
36:37 And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead.
36:38 And Saul died, and Baal-hanan, the son of Achbor, reigned in his stead.
36:39 And Baal-hanan, the son of Achbor, died, and Hadar reigned in his stead; and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
36:40 And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names: duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
36:41 Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
36:42 Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,
36:43 Duke Magdiel, duke Iram; these be the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession; he is Esau, the father of the Edomites.
Chapter 37
Joseph hated by his brothers--His two dreams--He is sold to the Ishmaelites, then to the Egyptians
37:1 And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.
37:2 And this is the history of the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives; and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.
37:3 Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children because he was the son of his old age; and he made him a coat of many colors.
37:4 And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him and could not speak peaceably unto him.
37:5 And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren; and they hated him yet the more.
37:6 And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed;
37:7 For behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and lo, my sheaf arose and also stood upright; and behold, your sheaves stood round about and made obeisance to my sheaf.
37:8 And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? Or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams and for his words.
37:9 And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and behold, the sun, and the moon, and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.
37:10 And he told it to his father and to his brethren; and his father rebuked him and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I, and thy mother, and thy brethren, indeed, come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
37:11 And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.
37:12 And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
37:13 And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? Come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.
37:14 And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
37:15 And a certain man found him, and behold, he was wandering in the field; and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
37:16 And he said, I seek my brethren; tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.
37:17 And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren and found them in Dothan.
37:18 And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.
37:19 And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.
37:20 Come now, therefore, and let us slay him and cast him into some pit. And we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him. And we shall see what will become of his dreams.
37:21 And Reuben heard it; and he delivered him out of their hands and said, Let us not kill him.
37:22 And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him--that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.
37:23 And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stripped Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colors that was on him;
37:24 And they took him and cast him into a pit; and the pit was empty; there was no water in it.
37:25 And they sat down to eat bread; and they lifted up their eyes and looked; and behold, a company of Ishmaelites came from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery, and balm, and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
37:26 And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother and conceal his blood?
37:27 Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh; and his brethren were content.
37:28 Then there passed by Midianites, merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver; and they brought Joseph into Egypt.
37:29 And Reuben returned unto the pit; and behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes,
37:30 And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?
37:31 And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;
37:32 And they sent the coat of many colors, and they brought it to their father, and said, This have we found; know now whether it be thy son's coat or no.
37:33 And he knew it and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
37:34 And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.
37:35 And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.
37:36 And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and captain of the guard.
Chapter 38
Judah's children--Tamar deceives Judah and bears twin sons
38:1 And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren and turned into a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
38:2 And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shuah; and he took her and went in and lay with her.
38:3 And she conceived and bare a son; and he called his name Er.
38:4 And she conceived again and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.
38:5 And she yet again conceived, and bare a son, and called his name Shelah; and he was at Chezib when she bare him.
38:6 And Judah took a wife for Er, his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.
38:7 And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the Lord; and the Lord slew him.
38:8 And Judah said unto Onan, Go and marry thy brother's wife, and raise up seed unto thy brother.
38:9 And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he married his brother's wife, that he would not lie with her, lest he should raise up seed unto his brother.
38:10 And the thing which he did displeased the Lord; wherefore, he slew him also.
38:11 Then said Judah to Tamar, his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow at thy father's house till Shelah, my son, be grown; for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
38:12 And in process of time, the daughter of Shuah, Judah's wife, died; and Judah was comforted and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend, Hirah, the Adullamite.
38:13 And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law goeth up to Timnath to shear his sheep.
38:14 And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her with a veil, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
38:15 When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a harlot because she had covered her face.
38:16 And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee; let me come in and lie with thee (for he knew not that she was his daughter-in-law). And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in and lie with me?
38:17 And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge till thou send it?
38:18 And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. And he gave it her and came in and slept with her; and she conceived by him.
38:19 And she arose, and went away, and laid by her veil from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
38:20 And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend, the Adullamite, to receive his pledge from the woman's hand; but he found her not.
38:21 Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot that was openly by the wayside? And they said, There was no harlot in this place.
38:22 And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said that there was no harlot in this place.
38:23 And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed; behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.
38:24 And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar, thy daughter-in-law, hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
38:25 When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child; and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these--the signet, and bracelets, and staff.
38:26 And Judah acknowledged them and said, She hath been more righteous than I because that I gave her not to Shelah, my son. And he knew her again no more.
38:27 And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.
38:28 And it came to pass when she travailed, that the one put out his hand; and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
38:29 And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out; and she said, How hast thou broken forth? This breach be upon thee; therefore, his name was called Pharez.
38:30 And afterward came out his brother that had the scarlet thread upon his hand; and his name was called Zarah.
Chapter 39
Joseph prospers in Egypt--He is betrayed by Potiphar's wife and imprisoned
39:1 And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmaelites, which had brought him down thither.
39:2 And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master, the Egyptian.
39:3 And his master saw that the Lord was with him and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
39:4 And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him; and he made him overseer over his house; and all that he had he put into his hand.
39:5 And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house and over all that he had, that the Lord blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house and in the field.
39:6 And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not aught he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly person and well favored.
39:7 And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.
39:8 But he refused and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master knoweth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;
39:9 There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back anything from me but thee, because thou art his wife; how then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
39:10 And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her or to be with her.
39:11 And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there within.
39:12 And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me; and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.
39:13 And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and was fled forth,
39:14 That she called unto the men of her house and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in a Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice;
39:15 And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out.
39:16 And she laid up his garment by her until his lord came home.
39:17 And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me;
39:18 And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me and fled out.
39:19 And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me, that his wrath was kindled.
39:20 And Joseph's master took him and put him into the prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound; and he was there in the prison.
39:21 But the Lord was with Joseph, and showed him mercy, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
39:22 And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the overseer of it.
39:23 The keeper of the prison looked not to anything that was under his hand because the Lord was with him; and that which he did, the Lord made it to prosper.
Chapter 40
Joseph interprets dreams of Pharaoh's butler and baker
40:1 And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord, the king of Egypt.
40:2 And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers--against the chief of the butlers and against the chief of the bakers.
40:3 And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
40:4 And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them; and they continued a season in ward.
40:5 And they dreamed a dream, both of them--each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream--the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison.
40:6 And Joseph came in unto them in the morning and looked upon them; and behold, they were sad.
40:7 And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly today?
40:8 And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? Tell me them, I pray you.
40:9 And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me;
40:10 And in the vine were three branches; and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes;
40:11 And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I took the grapes and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.
40:12 And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three days;
40:13 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head and restore thee unto thy place; and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand after the former manner when thou wast his butler.
40:14 But think on me when it shall be well with thee and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me; and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house;
40:15 For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews; and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
40:16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream; and behold, I had three white baskets on my head;
40:17 And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
40:18 And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof: The three baskets are three days;
40:19 Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.
40:20 And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants; and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.
40:21 And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand;
40:22 But he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them.
40:23 Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgot him.
Chapter 41
Joseph interprets Pharaoh's dreams--He is made chief steward--Manasseh and Ephraim born--Joseph's preparations save Egypt from famine
41:1 And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed; and behold, he stood by the river.
41:2 And behold, there came up out of the river seven well-favored kine and fat-fleshed; and they fed in a meadow.
41:3 And behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed, and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river.
41:4 And the ill-favored and lean-fleshed kine did eat up the seven well-favored and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.
41:5 And he slept and dreamed the second time; and behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.
41:6 And behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.
41:7 And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and behold, it was a dream.
41:8 And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt and all the wise men thereof; and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.
41:9 Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day;
41:10 Pharaoh was wroth with his servants and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker;
41:11 And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.
41:12 And there was there with us a young man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams, to each man according to his dream he did interpret.
41:13 And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.
41:14 Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon; and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.
41:15 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it; and I have heard say of thee that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
41:16 And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me; God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
41:17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river;
41:18 And behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fat-fleshed and well-favored; and they fed in a meadow;
41:19 And behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill-favored and lean-fleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness;
41:20 And the lean and the ill-favored kine did eat up the first seven fat kine;
41:21 And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were still ill-favored, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
41:22 And I saw in my dream, and behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good;
41:23 And behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprang up after them;
41:24 And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears; and I told this unto the magicians, but there was none that could declare it to me.
41:25 And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one; God hath showed Pharaoh what he is about to do.
41:26 The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years; the dream is one.
41:27 And the seven thin and ill-favored kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
41:28 This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do he showeth unto Pharaoh.
41:29 Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt;
41:30 And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land.
41:31 And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall be very grievous.
41:32 And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
41:33 Now, therefore, let Pharaoh look out a man, discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.
41:34 Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.
41:35 And let them gather all the food of those good years that come and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.
41:36 And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt, that the land perish not through the famine.
41:37 And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of all his servants.
41:38 And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?
41:39 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath showed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art.
41:40 Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled; only in the throne will I be greater than thou.
41:41 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.
41:42 And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;
41:43 And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee; and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.
41:44 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.
41:45 And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath, the daughter of Poti-pherah, priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
41:46 And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
41:47 And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
41:48 And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities; the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.
41:49 And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number.
41:50 And unto Joseph were born two sons, before the years of famine came, which Asenath, the daughter of Poti-pherah, priest of On, bare unto him.
41:51 And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh; For God, said he, hath made me forget all my toil and all my father's house.
41:52 And the name of the second called he Ephraim; For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.
41:53 And the seven years of plenteousness that was in the land of Egypt were ended.
41:54 And the seven years of dearth began to come according as Joseph had said; and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
41:55 And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread; and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.
41:56 And the famine was over all the face of the earth; and Joseph opened all the storehouses and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
41:57 And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn because that the famine was so sore in all lands.
Chapter 42
Jacob sends ten sons to buy corn in Egypt--They are imprisoned by Joseph--He keeps Simeon and sends brothers home with their money and corn
42:1 Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?
42:2 And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt; get you down thither and buy for us from thence, that we may live and not die.
42:3 And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
42:4 But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.
42:5 And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came, for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
42:6 And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land. And Joseph's brethren came and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.
42:7 And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
42:8 And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
42:9 And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them and said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
42:10 And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come.
42:11 We are all one man's sons; we are true men; thy servants are no spies.
42:12 And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
42:13 And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.
42:14 And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies;
42:15 Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
42:16 Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother; and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you; or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.
42:17 And he put them all together into ward three days.
42:18 And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do and live; for I fear God;
42:19 If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison; go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses;
42:20 But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.
42:21 And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.
42:22 And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child? And ye would not hear? Therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
42:23 And they knew not that Joseph understood them, for he spake unto them by an interpreter.
42:24 And he turned himself about from them, and wept, and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.
42:25 Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way; and thus did he unto them.
42:26 And they laded their asses with the corn and departed thence.
42:27 And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.
42:28 And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and lo, it is even in my sack; and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?
42:29 And they came unto Jacob, their father, unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them, saying,
42:30 The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us and took us for spies of the country.
42:31 And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies;
42:32 We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
42:33 And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone;
42:34 And bring your youngest brother unto me; then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men; so will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffic in the land.
42:35 And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack; and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.
42:36 And Jacob, their father, said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children; Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away; all these things are against me.
42:37 And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons if I bring him not to thee; deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
42:38 And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone; if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
Chapter 43
Israel sends his sons for more food--Joseph rejoices and makes a feast for his brothers
43:1 And the famine was sore in the land.
43:2 And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again; buy us a little food.
43:3 And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
43:4 If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food;
43:5 But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down; for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
43:6 And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
43:7 And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? Have ye another brother? And we told him according to the tenor of these words. Could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
43:8 And Judah said unto Israel, his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go, that we may live and not die--both we, and thou, and also our little ones.
43:9 I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him; if I bring him not unto thee and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame forever.
43:10 For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.
43:11 And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels and carry down the man a present--a little balm, and a little honey, spices and myrrh, nuts and almonds;
43:12 And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight.
43:13 Take also your brother and arise; go again unto the man;
43:14 And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.
43:15 And the men took that present; and they took double money in their hand and Benjamin, and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.
43:16 And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon.
43:17 And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph's house.
43:18 And the men were afraid because they were brought into Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in, that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.
43:19 And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they communed with him at the door of the house,
43:20 And said, O sir, we came, indeed, down at the first time to buy food;
43:21 And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks; and behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight; and we have brought it again in our hand.
43:22 And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food; we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.
43:23 And he said, Peace be to you; fear not; your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks; I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.
43:24 And the man brought the men into Joseph's house and gave them water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.
43:25 And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon; for they heard that they should eat bread there.
43:26 And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house and bowed themselves to him to the earth.
43:27 And he asked them of their welfare and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?
43:28 And they answered, Thy servant, our father, is in good health; he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads and made obeisance.
43:29 And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.
43:30 And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother; and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber and wept there.
43:31 And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
43:32 And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
43:33 And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright and the youngest according to his youth; and the men marveled one at another.
43:34 And he took and sent messes unto them from before him; but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs. And they drank and were merry with him.
Chapter 44
Joseph's tactic incriminates Benjamin--Judah pleads for Benjamin
44:1 And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth,
44:2 And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
44:3 As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.
44:4 And when they were gone out of the city and not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up; follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?
44:5 Is not this it in which my lord drinketh and whereby indeed he divineth? Ye have done evil in so doing.
44:6 And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.
44:7 And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing.
44:8 Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan. How then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
44:9 With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen.
44:10 And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words; he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.
44:11 Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.
44:12 And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest; and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
44:13 Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.
44:14 And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house, for he was yet there; and they fell before him on the ground.
44:15 And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? Knew ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?
44:16 And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? What shall we speak? Or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants; behold, we are my lord's servants, both we and he also with whom the cup is found.
44:17 And he said, God forbid that I should do so; but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.
44:18 Then Judah came near unto him and said, O my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant; for thou art even as Pharaoh.
44:19 My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father or a brother?
44:20 And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man; and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
44:21 And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.
44:22 And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father; for if he should leave his father, his father would die.
44:23 And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
44:24 And it came to pass, when we came up unto thy servant, my father, we told him the words of my lord.
44:25 And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.
44:26 And we said, We cannot go down; if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down; for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us.
44:27 And thy servant, my father, said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons;
44:28 And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since;
44:29 And if ye take this also from me and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
44:30 Now, therefore, when I come to thy servant, my father, and the lad be not with us, seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life,
44:31 It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die; and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant, our father, with sorrow to the grave.
44:32 For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father forever.
44:33 Now, therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad, a bondman to my lord, and let the lad go up with his brethren.
44:34 For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me, lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father?
Chapter 45
Joseph reveals himself to his brothers--Pharaoh and Joseph invite Israel's household to Egypt
45:1 Then Joseph could not refrain himself before them all that stood by him, and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.
45:2 And he wept aloud; and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.
45:3 And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph. Doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him, for they were troubled at his presence.
45:4 And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph, your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
45:5 Now, therefore, be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life.
45:6 For these two years hath the famine been in the land; and yet there are five years in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.
45:7 And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
45:8 So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God; and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
45:9 Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt; come down unto me; tarry not;
45:10 And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast;
45:11 And there will I nourish thee--for yet there are five years of famine--lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast come to poverty.
45:12 And behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.
45:13 And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.
45:14 And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
45:15 Moreover, he kissed all his brethren and wept upon them; and after that, his brethren talked with him.
45:16 And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come; and it pleased Pharaoh well and his servants.
45:17 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye: Lade your beasts and go; get you unto the land of Canaan;
45:18 And take your father and your households and come unto me; and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
45:19 Now thou art commanded; this do ye: Take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.
45:20 Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.
45:21 And the children of Israel did so; and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
45:22 To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver and five changes of raiment.
45:23 And to his father he sent after this manner: ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt and ten she asses laden with corn, and bread, and meat for his father by the way.
45:24 So he sent his brethren away, and they departed; and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.
45:25 And they went up out of Egypt and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob, their father,
45:26 And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not.
45:27 And they told him all the words of Joseph which he had said unto them; and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob, their father, revived.
45:28 And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph, my son, is yet alive; I will go and see him before I die.
Chapter 46
God assures Israel--Israel's household moves to Egypt--Joseph welcomes his father and family
46:1 And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.
46:2 And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.
46:3 And he said, I am God, the God of thy father; fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation.
46:4 I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again; and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
46:5 And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba; and the sons of Israel carried Jacob, their father, and their little ones, and their wives in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
46:6 And they took their cattle and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt--Jacob and all his seed with him:
46:7 His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt.
46:8 And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt: Jacob and his sons, Reuben, Jacob's firstborn,
46:9 And the sons of Reuben: Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi;
46:10 And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanitish woman;
46:11 And the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari;
46:12 And the sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zarah; but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.
46:13 And the sons of Issachar: Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron;
46:14 And the sons of Zebulun: Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
46:15 These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padan-aram, with his daughter Dinah; all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three.
46:16 And the sons of Gad: Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli;
46:17 And the sons of Asher: Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah, their sister; and the sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.
46:18 These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah, his daughter; and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.
46:19 The sons of Rachel, Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.
46:20 And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, which Asenath, the daughter of Poti-pherah, priest of On, bare unto him.
46:21 And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
46:22 These are the sons of Rachel which were born to Jacob; all the souls were fourteen.
46:23 And the son of Dan: Hushim;
46:24 And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
46:25 These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel, his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob; all the souls were seven.
46:26 All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore and six;
46:27 And the sons of Joseph, which were borne him in Egypt, were two souls; all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.
46:28 And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.
46:29 And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel, his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck and wept on his neck a good while.
46:30 And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive.
46:31 And Joseph said unto his brethren and unto his father's house, I will go up, and show Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren and my father's house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;
46:32 And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
46:33 And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you and shall say, What is your occupation?
46:34 That ye shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we and also our fathers; that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
Chapter 47
Israel settles in Goshen--Due to famine, Pharaoh becomes owner of all the land and people in Egypt
47:1 Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh and said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have are come out of the land of Canaan; and behold, they are in the land of Goshen.
47:2 And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.
47:3 And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we and also our fathers.
47:4 They said, moreover, unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks, for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan. Now, therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
47:5 And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee;
47:6 The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell; and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
47:7 And Joseph brought in Jacob, his father, and set him before Pharaoh; and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
47:8 And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?
47:9 And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty years; few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
47:10 And Jacob blessed Pharaoh and went out from before Pharaoh.
47:11 And Joseph placed his father and his brethren and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
47:12 And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household with bread, according to their families.
47:13 And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
47:14 And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan for the corn which they bought; and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
47:15 And when money failed in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph and said, Give us bread;. For why should we die in thy presence? For the money faileth.
47:16 And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.
47:17 And they brought their cattle unto Joseph; and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses; and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.
47:18 When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not aught left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies and our lands.
47:19 Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh; and give us seed, that we may live and not die, that the land be not desolate.
47:20 And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field because the famine prevailed over them; so the land became Pharaoh's.
47:21 And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.
47:22 Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them; wherefore, they sold not their lands.
47:23 Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh; lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.
47:24 And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh; and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.
47:25 And they said, Thou hast saved our lives; let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.
47:26 And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.
47:27 And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.
47:28 And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years; so the whole age of Jacob was a hundred forty and seven years.
47:29 And the time drew nigh that Israel must die; and he called his son Joseph and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt;
47:30 But I will lie with my fathers; and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.
47:31 And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.
Chapter 48
Joseph visits his sick father--Jacob blesses Ephraim and Manasseh--Jacob prophesies return to Canaan
48:1 And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Joseph, saying, Behold, thy father is sick. And he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
48:2 And it was told Jacob, saying, Look, and behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee; and Israel strengthened himself and sat upon the bed.
48:3 And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
48:4 And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful and multiply thee, saith the Lord; and I will make of thee a multitude of people, and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.
48:5 And now, of thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, behold, they are mine, and the God of my fathers shall bless them; even as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be blessed, for they are mine; wherefore, they shall be called after my name. Therefore, they were called Israel.
48:6 And thy issue which thou begettest after them shall be thine and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance in the tribes; therefore, they were called the tribes of Manasseh and of Ephraim.
48:7 And Jacob said unto Joseph, When the God of my fathers appeared unto me in Luz in the land of Canaan, he sware unto me that he would give unto me and unto my seed the land for an everlasting possession.
48:8 Therefore, O my son, he hath blessed me in raising thee up to be a servant unto me, in saving my house from death,
48:9 In delivering my people, thy brethren, from famine which was sore in the land; wherefore, the God of thy fathers shall bless thee and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren and above thy father's house;
48:10 For thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee before thou wast sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore, thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins forever;
48:11 For thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity from bondage and to bring salvation unto them when they are altogether bowed down under sin.
48:12 And, therefore, as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan, in the way when we were yet but a little way to come unto Ephrath; and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is called Bethlehem.
48:13 And Israel beheld Joseph's sons and said, Who are these?
48:14 And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this land.
48:15 And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me; and I will bless them.
48:16 Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see well. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.
48:17 And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face; and lo, God hath showed me also thy seed.
48:18 And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
48:19 And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him.
48:20 And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.
48:21 And he blessed Joseph and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,
48:22 The Angel, which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
48:23 And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him; and he held up his father's hand to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.
48:24 And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father; for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.
48:25 And his father refused and said, I know it, my son, I know it; he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great; but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
48:26 And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh; and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
48:27 And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die; but God shall be with you and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
48:28 Moreover, I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
Chapter 49
Israel blesses his sons--He dies
49:1 And Jacob called unto his sons and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you what shall befall you in the last days.
49:2 Gather yourselves together and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel, your father.
49:3 Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power;
49:4 Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel because thou wentest up to thy father's bed, then defiledst thou it; he went up to my couch.
49:5 Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.
49:6 O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united; for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall.
49:7 Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel; I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel.
49:8 Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise; thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.
49:9 Judah is a lion's whelp; from the prey, my son, thou art gone up; he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion. Who shall rouse him up?
49:10 The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.
49:11 Binding his foal unto the vine and his ass's colt unto the choice vine, he washed his garments in wine and his clothes in the blood of grapes;
49:12 His eyes shall be red with wine and his teeth white with milk.
49:13 Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea and shall be for a haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.
49:14 Issachar is a strong ass, couching down between two burdens;
49:15 And he saw that rest was good and the land that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.
49:16 Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel.
49:17 Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.
49:18 I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.
49:19 Gad, a troop shall overcome him; but he shall overcome at the last.
49:20 Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.
49:21 Naphtali is a hind let loose; he giveth goodly words.
49:22 Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well, whose branches run over the wall;
49:23 The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him;
49:24 But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob--from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel--
49:25 Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee, and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb;
49:26 The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills; they shall be on the head of Joseph and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
49:27 Benjamin shall raven as a wolf; in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.
49:28 All these are the twelve tribes of Israel; and this is it that their father spake unto them and blessed them; everyone according to his blessing he blessed them.
49:29 And he charged them and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people; bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron, the Hittite,
49:30 In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron, the Hittite, for a possession of a burying place.
49:31 There they buried Abraham and Sarah, his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah, his wife; and there I buried Leah.
49:32 The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth.
49:33 And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.
Chapter 50
Israel is buried in Canaan--Joseph prophesies of a righteous branch, the Messiah, and a choice seer--Joseph dies
50:1 And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.
50:2 And Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father; and the physicians embalmed Israel.
50:3 And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed; and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days.
50:4 And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
50:5 My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die; in my grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now, therefore, let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father; and I will come again.
50:6 And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
50:7 And Joseph went up to bury his father; and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
50:8 And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's house; only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds they left in the land of Goshen.
50:9 And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen; and it was a very great company.
50:10 And they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan; and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation; and he made a mourning for his father seven days.
50:11 And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians; wherefore, the name of it was called Abel-mizraim, which is beyond Jordan.
50:12 And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them;
50:13 For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a burying place of Ephron, the Hittite, before Mamre.
50:14 And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
50:15 And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
50:16 And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,
50:17 So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil; and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.
50:18 And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we be thy servants.
50:19 And Joseph said unto them, Fear not. For am I in the place of God?
50:20 But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
50:21 Now, therefore, fear ye not; I will nourish you and your little ones. And he comforted them and spake kindly unto them.
50:22 And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his father's house; and Joseph lived a hundred and ten years.
50:23 And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation; the children also of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were brought up upon Joseph's knees.
50:24 And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die and go unto my fathers; and I go down to my grave with joy. The God of my father Jacob be with you, to deliver you out of affliction in the days of your bondage; for the Lord hath visited me, and I have obtained a promise of the Lord that out of the fruit of my loins the Lord God will raise up a righteous branch out of my loins; and unto thee, whom my father Jacob hath named Israel, a prophet (not the Messiah who is called Shilo); and this prophet shall deliver my people out of Egypt in the days of thy bondage.
50:25 And it shall come to pass that they shall be scattered again; and a branch shall be broken off and shall be carried into a far country; nevertheless, they shall be remembered in the covenants of the Lord when the Messiah cometh; for he shall be made manifest unto them in the latter days, in the Spirit of power, and shall bring them out of darkness into light--out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom.
50:26 A seer shall the Lord my God raise up, who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loins.
50:27 Thus saith the Lord God of my fathers unto me, A choice seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins, and he shall be esteemed highly among the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loins, his brethren.
50:28 And he shall bring them to the knowledge of the covenants which I have made with thy fathers; and he shall do whatsoever work I shall command him.
50:29 And I will make him great in mine eyes, for he shall do my work; and he shall be great like unto him whom I have said I would raise up unto you, to deliver my people, O house of Israel, out of the land of Egypt; for a seer will I raise up to deliver my people out of the land of Egypt; and he shall be called Moses. And by this name he shall know that he is of thy house; for he shall be nursed by the king's daughter and shall be called her son.
50:30 And again, a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins, and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins--and not to the bringing forth of my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them in the last days;
50:31 Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write, and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah shall grow together unto the confounding of false doctrines, and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to a knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord.
50:32 And out of weakness shall he be made strong in that day when my work shall go forth among all my people, which shall restore them who are of the house of Israel in the last days.
50:33 And that seer will I bless, and they that seek to destroy him shall be confounded; for this promise I give unto you; for I will remember you from generation to generation; and his name shall be called Joseph, and it shall be after the name of his father; and he shall be like unto you; for the thing which the Lord shall bring forth by his hand shall bring my people unto salvation.
50:34 And the Lord sware unto Joseph that he would preserve his seed forever, saying, I will raise up Moses, and a rod shall be in his hand; and he shall gather together my people, and he shall lead them as a flock; and he shall smite the waters of the Red Sea with his rod.
50:35 And he shall have judgment and shall write the word of the Lord. And he shall not speak many words, for I will write unto him my law by the finger of mine own hand. And I will make a spokesman for him, and his name shall be called Aaron.
50:36 And it shall be done unto thee in the last days also, even as I have sworn. Therefore, Joseph said unto his brethren, God will surely visit you and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and to Jacob.
50:37 And Joseph confirmed many other things unto his brethren and took an oath of the children of Israel, saying unto them, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.
50:38 So Joseph died when he was a hundred and ten years old; and they embalmed him, and they put him in a coffin in Egypt; and he was kept from burial by the children of Israel, that he might be carried up and laid in the sepulcher with his father. And thus they remembered the oath which they sware unto him.

